
===== PAGE 1 =====
3 70 CYTOPATHOGENIC EFFECT 
nounced, was still significant in concentra- 
tions of the antibiotic which were consider- 
ably lower than the therapeutic blood levels 
OF POLIOMYELITIS VIRUSES 
ordinarily employed in clinical practice. 
Received July 31, 1953. P.S.E.R.M., lG.<O. vi5. 
Cytopathogenic Effect of Poliomyelitis Viruses In vitro on Human 
Embryonic Tissues.* (18202) 
FREDERICK C. ROBRINS, JOHX F. ENDERS AND THOMAS H. WELLER. 
From the Research DizliAion of Inlectioirh Diseases, The Children's Medical Center, the Depart 
iiierzts of Pedintricy aizd Haclerinlogjl r!;trf Ininizinology, Haward Medical School and the 
Departiiirizt oj Tropical Pirblic Health, Hurvard School of Pubk Hc'aEth, Boston, i2luss. 
11-e have previously described the cul tim- 
tion oi the Lansing and Rrunhilde strains of 
poliomyeliiis virus in suspended cell cultures 
of human non-nervous and nervous tissue 
(1.2). It was also noted that degenerative 
changes occurred in cells from cultures in- 
oculakxi wiGh the Lansing virus ( 1 ) that were 
more extensive than in tissues from unin- 
oc:ilated cul:ures. This phenomenon has been 
more extensively investigated. The most sig- 
nificant observations will be here summarized ; 
a inore detailed account will he published 
later. 
Haterials and methods. Suspended cell 
cultures. The procedures have been previously 
described( 1,3). As routine 50 units of peni- 
cillin and 50 pg of streptomycin per cc have 
been included in the medium. Plasma hang- 
ing drop cultures. Fragments of tissue from 
suspended cell cultures were explanted in 
plasma hanging drop cultures. The medium 
in which each fragment was embedded con- 
sisted of 2 drops of heparinized fowl plasma, 
one drop of chick embryo extract and one 
drop of beef embryo extract. Usually 8 cul- 
tures were prepared in a petri dish(4). This 
method permits the study of large numbers 
of fragments with economy of time and effort. 
*Aided by a grant from the Kational Foundation 
1. Enders, J. F., Weller, T. H., and Robbins, F. C., 
2. Weller. T. H., Robbins. F. C., and Enders, J. F., 
3. Kcller, T. H.. and Enders, J. F., PROC. SOC. 
4. Enders, J. F., and Florman, A. L., PROC. SOC. 
~- -________ - _-- -_ 
for Infantile Paralysis, Inc. 
.J'CI'PIICP, 1019, ~109. 85. 
PRUC. soc. ExP. Bier.. b3~ MED., 1949, vi?, 153. 
EXP. HIOL. .\SD JbD., 1948, ~69, 124. 
EXP. BIOL. AND MED., 1942, v49, 153. 
Roller tube cultures. The general method has 
been presented in detail(5). The medium 
used in these experiments consisted of 9 parts 
of the Hanks-Simms solution adopted as 
routine for the suspended cell cultures (1:3) 
and 1 part of beef embryo extract. Two cc 
of this rnixture was employed in each culture. 
pH deterwzinatiom. The pH of suspended cell 
cultures was determined colorirnetrically by 
direct comparison of each culture with a set 
of standard buffer solutions. The latter were 
prepared in 25 cc Erlenmeyer flasks each 
containing 3 cc of solution and the same 
concentration of phenol red as the Hanks- 
Simms solution used as culture medium. 
Sections of tissue fragments from suspended 
cell cultures. At the end of an experiment, 
Zenker's solution without acetic acid was 
added to the fragments in each flask. After 
fixation the fragments from one set of cuI- 
tures were combined, embedded and stained 
with hematoxylin and emin. Viruses. The 
Lansing and Brunhilde strains of poliomy- 
elitis virus have been used ( 1'2). Antisera. 
Specific monkey antiserum for the Brun- 
hilde strain was obtained through the cour- 
tesy of Dr. Jonas Salk. Lansing immune 
serum was prepared in this labosatory by re- 
psated intramuscular injection of a monkey 
with infected monkey cord. This serum di- 
luted 1 : 1000 completely protected mice 
against 1-3 LD50 of virus, but failed to pro- 
tect in a dilution of 1:SOOO. 
Expe&enta&. Changes in cell morphology 
5. Feller, A. E., Enders, J. F., and Weller, T. H., 
J. Exp. Med., 1940, v72, 367. 
===== PAGE 2 =====
CYTOPATHOGENIC EFFECT OF POLIOMYELITIS 171RUSES 371 
in fragments from suspended cell cultures. 
Sections of fragments from 12 serial cultures 
of the Lansing virus in human embryonic 
skin-muscle have been examined along with 
material from 11 successive cultures of an- 
other comparable series inoculated with the 
same virus. Sections from cultures to which 
no virus was added were, in every case, com- 
pared with the corresponding inoculated ma- 
terial. The results were as follows: Eleven 
cultures included in these 2 series were main- 
tained for periods approximating 30 days 
(mean period of cultivation 29 days, range 
21-32 days). In sections from these, few or no 
well preserved cells were seen. The changes 
observed consisted of loss of typical staining 
properties, nuclear pyknosis and fragmenta- 
tion of cells. In contrast normal-appearing 
well-stained cells were present in one or more 
of the fragments (that had not been exposed 
to the virus. The number of such cells varied 
but, in all but one instance, were recorded as 
fairly numerous to numerous. The cells that 
regularly presented the best state of preser- 
vation in unlnfected cultures resembled young 
fibroblasts with large oval nuclei staining 
pale blue and containing many small chro- 
matin granules. Moreover, the nuclei of 
muscle cells in many cases appeared to be 
in good condition. When the period of ex- 
posure to the virus was shorter, i.e. 16-20 days, 
differences between inoculated and uninocu- 
lated tissue were nlot always apparent. In 
certain experiments, however, even by the 
16 th day 'of culltivation sections of uninocu- 
lated fragments could be easily distinguished 
from those of irvfected tissue. 
A comparable experiment was carried out 
with the Brunhilde strain. Sections of em- 
bryonic skin-muscle fragments from 10 suc- 
cessive cultures were studied, With the ex- 
ception of material from the first and seventh 
culture, cellular degeneration was more 
marked in the infected fragments. Essen- 
tially similar results were recorded in 10 serial 
cultures of human embryonic intestine inocu- 
lated with the Lansing virus. 
Examination lof material from Aask cul- 
tures of human embryonic brain inoculated 
with Lansing and Brunhilde viruses on the 
whole revealed more extensive cellular de- 
generation than was noted in control material. 
The differences, however, in some cases were 
not so distinct as with the other tissues. 
Tissue 
fragments in which certain other viruses have 
been propagated fail to exhibit migration or 
peripheral growth of cells characteristic of 
normal tissues in plasma cultures (4,6,7). In 
view of these (observations and our histologic 
findings the migratory capacity of cells re- 
moved from flask cultures of virus was de- 
termined. Plasma hanging drop cultures were 
prepared with fragments removed from flask 
cultures at intervals following inoculation of 
virus. Control cultures were made with un- 
inoculated fragments. Skin-muscle tissue from 
embryos of not over four months gestation 
has alone yielded, with regularity, a zone of 
migrating or growing cells sufficiently dense 
to provide a reliable indicator system. Other 
tissues examined were embryonic brain and 
intestine, as well as foreskin and kidney from 
young children. The results of a number of 
experiments were essentially the same. Frag- 
ments of skin-muscle from flasks in which 
virus multiplication was demonstrated by ani- 
mal inoculation either failed to show cell 
migration or, if this occurred, it was scanty 
and within 5 days the emigrating cells ex- 
hilbited pronounced degenerative changes. In 
contrast nearly all fragments from control 
uninoculated flasks developed within 48-72 
hours well defined zones af normal-appearing 
cells which continued to increase and presented 
a normal appearance for at least 7 days. The 
effect of the virus on cell migration was not 
clearly demonstrable until the flask cultures 
had been maintained for 8 to 21 days. 
In Table I are summarized the results of 
an experiment in which the minimal quantity 
of virus was determined that exerted a definite 
inhibitory action on cell migration. Each of 
a group of 3 flask cultures of human embry- 
onic skin-muscle tissue were inoculated with 
0.1 cc od a dilution of the Lansing or Brun- 
h?lde strain. After these cultures had been 
The inhibition of cell migration. 
__. ~~________ 
6. Huang, C. H., J. Exp, Med., 1943, vZ8, 111. 
7. Plotz. H., and Ephrussi, B., Conzpt. read. Soc 
Riol., 1933, v112, 525. 
===== PAGE 3 =====
372 CYTOPATHOGENIC EFFECT 
TAELE 11. Cytoputliogeiiic Effect of Brunhilde 
Virus in Roller Tube Cultures of Humin b:iiibr~-- 
o ii i c Ski u - 1\T ii sc 1 t' . 
Dilutions of Grunliilclt. \-i ru iiiciculatecl. 
SO 
l(l-2 10 :; 1ll-4 1rl < 1- i r 11s 
++ +-f ++ +o 0 u 
maintained in the usual manner for 22 days, 
tissue fragments were removed and plasma 
hanging drop cultures prepared. From the 
table it is evident that both viruses, when 
diluted 10 and 10 respectively affected 
normal cell migration. In the case of the 
Lansing strain, the pooled fluids removed from 
the flasks inoculated with 10 dilution pro- 
duced paralysis and death in mice whereas 
those from the cultures inoculated with 10 
dilution caused no disease. 117th the Brun- 
hilde virus: similar confirmatory experiments 
in animals have not yet been performed. 
The effect of the virus on cell migration 
revealed by the explant method suggested 
that the roller tube technic which provides 
large numbers of actively growing cells might 
furnish a more convenient and rapid pro- 
cedure for the demonstration of cell injury. 
Roller tube cultures of human embryonic 
skin-muscle were prepared and after 4 days 
incubation at 3 7 C were each inoculated with 
0.1 cc of a dilution of Brunhilde tissue culture 
virus. Two roller tube cultures were inocu- 
OF POLIOMYELITIS VIRUSES 
lated with each dilution of virus. Uninoculated 
cultures were included for comparison. In- 
cubation was continued and the cultures ex- 
amined daily. The findings on the 5th day 
after inoculation and which were constant 
thereafter are summarized in Table 11. 
Lansing tissue culture virus appears to behave 
in a similar manner in roller tube cultures. 
These observations indicate that poliomyelitis 
virus adapted to growth in human tissues 
rapidly destroys the cells growing out from 
human skin-muscle. 
Effect of virus on tissue metabolism as 
indicated by decreased acid production. The 
degenerative changes in the infected cells 
suggested that cellular metabolism might be 
impaired. Furthermore, in the case of tissues 
infected with certain other viruses a diminu- 
tion in acid production and in their capacity 
to reduce methylene blue have been described 
Experiments have shown that acid pro- 
duction in flask cultures of human embryonic 
brain, intestine and skin-muscle inoculated 
with Lansing and Brunhilde strains, after a 
variable interval, declines more rapidly than 
in control cultures withlout virus. The time 
after addition of the virus at which significant 
differences become apparent has been found 
to vary according to the amount of virus in- 
oculated and the lot of tissue employed, 
Moreover, the pH of individual cultures in- 
oculated with the same material may oc- 
casionally vary within a fairly wide range. 
-1 frequent cause of this variation is failure 
to insert the stopper tightly. As an example, 
pH readings recorded in one experiment are 
given in Table 111. Various dilutions of a 
suspension of mouse brain infected with Lan- 
sing virus were inoculated into a series of flask 
cultures of human embryonic brain, Each 
figure represents the average of readings of the 
pH of the medium in three flasks at the end of 
periods of 3 to 5 days before the addition 
of fresh medium. By the 15th day the 
cultures inoculated with the three lowest di- 
lutions exhibited a pH differential of 0.2 to 
@,9) * 
8. Huang, C. H., PROC. Soc. EXP. BIOL. AND MED., 
1943, v3, 1943. 
9. Plotz, H., Compt. rend. SOC. Bid, 1935, v118, 
1400. 
===== PAGE 4 =====
CYTOPATHOGENIC EFFECT OF POLIOMYELITIS k’IRUSES 3 73 
TABLE 111. Ikterminations of the pH of the 
Fluid Phase of Flask Cultures of Human Embry- 
onic Brain Inoculated with Lansing Virus. 
Days after inoculation of culture 
Dil. of virnst il \ 
inoculated 3 7 11 15 20 24 28 
~ 
10-1 6.P 6.8 6.9 7.1 7.2 7.3 7.3 
10-2 6.8 6.8 6.9 7.1 7.2 7.3 7.3 
10-3 6.8 6.8 6.8 7.0 7.1 7.3 7.3 
10-4 6.8 6.8 6.8 6.9 6.9 7.8 7.3 
104 6.8 6.8 6.8 6.8 6.8 6.8 6.9 
3’0 virus 6.8 6.8 6.8 6.8 6.8 6.8 6.9 
~ 
* Avg of individual pfI readings of the medium 
in three flasks. Supernatant fluids were removed 
and fresh medium added on the days indicated. 
Readings were made just before this was done. 
The pH of the fresh medium varies from about 
1. I-7.5. 
t The virus consisted of a suspension of infected 
mouse brain. Three cultures were each inoculated 
with 0.1 ee of each dilution. 
nr 
TABLE IV. Specific Inhibition by Immune Serum 
of the Cytopsthogenic Effect of Poliomyelitis 
Virus as Indicated by Cell Migration.“ 
Type of serum 
7 
Lansing Brunhilde 
Virus immune immune Xomial 
iiioculuiii inonkey monkey monkey 
Lansing t 12/12 II 0/12 0/12 
Brunhilde t 0/12 12/12 0/12 
+ The technic employed was as follows: 0.1 cc of 
serum inactivated at 56°C for 30 min. was added 
to each flask culture of human embryonic skin- 
muscle. Onehalf hour later 0.1 cc of virus inocu- 
lum was added to each flask. The cultures mere 
inaintainrd iii the usual manner. Explant prepara- 
tions were made on the 26th day after inoculation 
of the flasks. 
t liicculuni : undiluted pooled supernatant fluid 
of 13th subculture of Lansing virus in skin-muscle 
flask cultures. 
$ hoculum : undiluted pooled supernatant fluid 
of 9th subculture of Brunhilde virus in skin-muscle 
flask cultures. 
11 No. explanted fragments showing normal mi- 
gration after 5 days incubation 
Total No. fragments explanted from flask 
cultures 
0.3 as compared with the controls. We have 
regarded as significant a difference of 0.2. 
By the 20th day those inoculated with dilu- 
tior? likewise showed a significant dif- 
ference. So differential was observed in the 
cultures receiving dilution. Intracerebral 
injection of mice with the poled fluids re- 
moved on the 15th day sholwed that virus was 
present in the cultures inoculated with virus 
dilutions and lC4 but not with 
It should be pointed out that the endpoint of 
viral activity obtained by the explant method 
as recorded in Table I agrees with that based 
on pH differential. In general this criterion 
for the presence of virus in cultures has proved 
useful and reliable, although in a few in- 
stances a significant difference has not been 
recorded during the period of observation. 
Specific inhibition of cytopathogenic e,gect 
of zirus by immune serum. To obtain addition- 
al evidence for the specificity of the degenera- 
tive changes noted in infected tissues, the 
effect of the addition of specific immune serum 
was determined. Two procedures were em- 
ployed. In the first, virus and serum were 
added to flask cultures of skin-muscle and, 
after incubation, tissue fragments were ex- 
planted to plasma drop cultures. In the second, 
virus and serum were added to freshly pre- 
pared roller tube cultures of skin-muscle. 
In Table IV the results of an experiment 
carried out by the first method are presented. 
It is evident that (a) normal monkey serum 
fails to protect the cells against the cyto- 
pathogenic action of the virus; (b) the anti- 
serum prevents lthe cytopathogenic effect as 
indicated by the capacity of the cells to 
migrate in a normal manner; (c) the effect 
of the antiserum is type specific. 
In this series to which the Lansing strain 
was added virus was demonstrated by mouse 
inoculation in the supernatant fluids of cul- 
tures containing normal and Brunhilde im- 
mune serum but not in those from cultures 
containing homologous immune serum. Per- 
manent inhibition of viral multiplication by 
homologous antiserum, however, has not 
always been observed in this type of experi- 
ment. 
-An experiment in roller tube cultures with 
Brunhilde virus and antisera against this 
virus and the Lansing strain has demon- 
strated a similar capacity of the homologous 
serum to prevent cell degeneration. Clear 
cut results were obtained by this method 
within 5 days after inoculation of the cultures. 
Since this inhibitory effect of antiserum 
appears to be type specific it can be concluded 
that the degenerative changes observed were 
produced by the action of the virus on the 
cells. 
===== PAGE 5 =====
3 74 PRODIGIOSIN -ACTIVITY AGAINST E. histolytica 
Szknzmnoi.~~ and discussion. The experiments 
which have been described demonstrate the 
capacity of the Lansing and Brunhilde strains 
of poliomyelitis virus to cause cell injury and 
death. This cytopathogenic property is re- 
vealed ( 1 ) by degenerative changes produced 
in infected tissue fragments in flask cultures 
and apparent on histologic examination; (2) 
by failure of such tissue fragments to exhibit 
normal cell migration when explanted to plas- 
ma cultures; (3) by degeneration of newly 
emigrated cells in roller-tube cultures: (4) by 
decreased acid production by infected cells. 
The conclusion that certain of these manifesta- 
tions of injury are induced as a result of 
infection by the virus is further supported by 
the fact that type specific immune serum 
prevents their development. These phenomena 
are of interest from two general points of 
view-. First. the)- leave no doubt that polio- 
myelitis virus in vitm can multiply in cells 
other than those of the nervous system and 
cause profound injury of such cells. Secondly, 
they provide criteria by which the presence 
of the virus can be recognized ilz vitro and 
hence may afford a basis of technics for iso- 
lating virus from patients or animals, for 
the quantitative assay of virus, for serologic 
typing and possibly for the screening of chemo- 
therapeutic and antibiotic substances. Fur- 
ther study will be required of the reliability 
and practicability of the application of these 
phenomena to such ends.+ 
t Tbc authors are grateful to Marguerite Bucking- 
ham, Gloria Florentino, Carolyn Keane, and Sheila 
Richardson ior essential technica1 assistance and to 
Dr. Duncan Reid and the members of the staff of the 
Bostcin Lying-in Hospital for their assistance in ob- 
taining materials for this study. 
Received July 31, 1950. P.S.E.B.M., 1950, v75. 
Biological Studies on E.nfcrmoebci histolytic~. IV. Direct Action of the 
Antibiotic, Prodigiosin.“ ( 18203) 
-1ntibiotics have been applied against En- 
tniiiorba histolytica as part of the search for 
more effective chemotherapeutic agents. AI- 
though various accepted antibiotics (peni- 
cillin streptomycin. aureoniycin, chloromy- 
cetin: etc.) have been tested in zlifro, no clear- 
cut evidence has been presented of their 
direct action upon the amoebae. recent 
report from Anderson’s laboratory aptly sum- 
marizes the situation: “A11 antibiotics tested 
to date have shown some degree of bacterio- 
static activity, and death of the ameba in 
cotton-stoppered tubes is shown to be due 
to inhibition of growth of the associated 
bacteria rather than to direct action of the 
antibiotic on E. histoZytica”( 1). The present 
*Part of a project supported by a research grant 
from the Sational Institutes of Health, Public Health 
Service. 
1. Bradin, J., and Hansen, E., Fed. Proc., 1949, 
v8, 276. 
experiments were designed to meet these ob- 
jections, and the data presented below are 
submitted as the first proof of direct action 
by an antibiotic on E. histolytica. 
Our original interest in prodigiosin sprang 
both from the long-known antagonism ex- 
hibited by chromogenic strains of Serratia 
nzarcescens against various microorganisms, 
and the feasibility of using the corresponding 
antibiotic pigment, prodigiosin, whose extrac- 
tion and structure had been elucidated by 
Wrede and co-workers( 2). Antibacterial ac- 
tivity has been demonstrated against gram- 
positive types, inchding Bacillus antkracis 
(3 ) , Coyyebacterium diphtheriue and Neis- 
seria gonorrhoeae (4), Pasteuretla pestis (5) , 
2, Wrede, F., and Ro;tth.aas, A., 2. f. physiol. Chem., 
3. Rettger, L., J. Infect. Dis., 1905, v2, 562. 
4. Eider, M., and Jacobsohn, I., 2. f. Hyg. Infek- 
1934, v226, 95. 
tionskr., 1936, vll7, 76. 