
===== PAGE 1 =====
PLAQUE FORMATION AND ISOLATION OF PURE LINES WITH 
POLIOMYELITIS VIRUSES* 
BY R. DULBECCO, M.D., AND MARGUERITE VOGT, M.D. 
(From the California Institute of Tecknology, Pasadena) 
(Received for publication, June 1, 1953) 
The production of plaques on a monolayer of chicken embryonic cells with 
Western equine encephalomyelitis virus (1) has opened the possibility of 
studying animal virus-host cell systems along lines similar to those followed 
in bacteriophage work. In trying to extend the previous results to other animal 
viruses, attention was directed to the viruses of the poliomyelitis group. These 
viruses, besides their practicalimportance, have many advantageous properties: 
great stability, good growth in tissue culture, and marked cytopathogenicity 
(2). In addition they display a certain degree of genetic variability, as inferred 
from their occurrence in various types and laboratory-adapted lines, so that 
they may lend themselves to studies of genetic variation. 
The present work concerns the production of plaques on monolayer cultures 
of monkey tissue by poliomyelitis viruses. It will be shown that the plaques 
can be efficiently used for titration purposes, and that pure lines of the viruses 
can be isolated from single plaques. In addition, virus stocks of high titer have 
been obtained during the development of this work. 
Material and Methods 
Solutions and Media 
Phosphate-Buffered Saline (PBS).--(a) NaC1 8.0 gm., KC1 0.2 gm., Na~-IPO4 1.15 gin. 
KH~PO4 0.2 gr., water 800 ml.; (b) CaC12 0.1 gin., water 100 ml.; (c) MgCI2.6H20 0.1 gm.. 
water 100 ml. Autoclave (a), (b), and (c) separately; mix when cooled. Trypsin (Nutritiona; 
Biochemical Co.) 0.25 per cent in PBS, sterilized by filtration. 
Tissue Culture Fluid.--Earle's saline (ES) (3), 8 parts, horse serum, 6 parts, chicken em- 
bryo extract (1:1 in ES), 3 parts; Earle's saline and horse serum were sterilized by pressure 
filtration through a Selas falter of porosity 03; the embryo extract was prepared under sterile 
conditions. An amount of 100/~g. of streptomycin and 100 units of penicillin per ml. were 
added to the saline solutions. 
Agar Overlay.---One pound of Difco agar was washed in twenty changes of tap water, and 
two changes of distilled water (10 to 15 liters per change); after decanting the last water, the 
agar was freed of excess water by squeezing it in a towel. 3 liters of acetone was then added to 
the agar. After 1 hour, the acetone was replaced with the same volume of fresh acetone, and a 
* Aided by a grant from The National Foundation for Infantile Paralysis, Inc. 
167 

===== PAGE 2 =====
168 PLAQUE ]?ORMATION AND POLIOMYELITIS VIRUSES 
similar change of acetone was repeated after a further hour. Finally, the acetone was eliminated 
by suction in a Buchner funnel. The agar was then collected from the funnel and spread on a 
sheet of aiumlnum foil. The agar was allowed to dry by the heat of three normal lamps and 
was collected when completely dry. 
(A) 2.7 per cent solution of washed agar in hot distilled water was distributed into a series of 
test tubes which were then autoclaved and tightly closed with sterile rubber stoppers. Care 
was taken not to autoclave them again, since on rcautoclaving toxic products arise from the 
agar. 
(B) A 1/10,000 solution of neutral red in distilled water, sterilized by autoclaving. 
(C) Fourfold Earle's saline. The pH of this solution was brought to 7.4 by bubbling CO~ into 
it immediately after solution of all the ingredients; it was sterilized by pressure filtration 
through a Selas filter, porosity 03, and distributed into test tubes which were kept well stop- 
pered in the refrigerator. 
( D) Chicken embryo extract (1:1 in ES). 
The agar overlay, used to Overlay the cultures after infection, consisted of 12 parts of 2.7 
per cent agar (A), 12 parts of neutral red solution (B), 8 parts of fourfold Earle's saline (C), 
and 5 parts of embryo extract (D). The agar tubes were first heated in boiling water until the 
agar melted, and subsequently transferred to a 43°C. water bath; the ingredients (B), (C), 
and (D) were prewarmed at 43°C., and added to the melted agar. The agar mixture was kept 
at 43°C. until used. 
Preparation of Tissue Cultures 
In most of the experiments, the source of tissue was cynomo/gua monkey kidney, and in few 
experiments the testis. Two kidneys (or testes) at a time were minced into small pieces (1 to 
4 ram. 8 in size), washed several times in PBS, and transferred into a small flask containing 
60 ml. of a prewarmed (37°C.) 0.25 per cent trypsin solution. After 10 minutes' incubation 
at 37°C., the trypsin was decanted and substituted by approximately 20 ml. of fresh pre- 
warmed trypsin. The tissue was then pipetted several (10 to 15) times back and forth with an 
automatic pipette having a bore of about 3 ram. diameter. The pipetting was done fairly vig- 
orously to break up the tissue fragments into clusters of cells and single cells. After having 
allowed the large fragments to settle down, the turbid supematant containing single cells, 
cell clusters, and cell debris, was poured into a centrifuge tube. About 20 ml. of fresh pre- 
warmed trypsin was added to the fragments left in the flask; the tissue was again pipetted 
back and forth, and the supernatant collected. The same procedure was repeated 15 to 20 
times until the parenchymatous kidney tissue had been entirely converted into cell clusters or 
single cells. This moment was recognizable by the fact that the original fragments had lost 
their brownish color and were now mere whitish connective tissue masses that tended to stick 
to each other. All superuatants were centrifuged at 600 I~.F.M. for 2 minutes, and the pellets 
resuspended in PBS in one-half of the original volume. Two additional, similar centrifugations 
in which the pellets were again resuspended in half of the previous volume of PBS were car- 
ried out. The final pellets were resuspended in 20 to 40 times their volume of Earle's saline. 
2 ml. of this suspension containing cell clusters and single cells, 1.5 ml. of horse serum, and 
0.75 ml. of embryo extract were used to start a culture in a 60 ram. pyrex dish. From 15 to 
30 cultures could be obtained from one kidney. The cultures were incubated at 38°C. in a 
well humified incubator. To control the pH of the culture fluid in the unsealed Petri dishes, 
the incubator received a continuous flow of air containing 3 per cent of CO~. The cultures were 
incubated until the bottom of the Petri dishes was covered by a continuous cell layer. The 
culture fluid was changed every 3 days. 

===== PAGE 3 =====
R. DULBECCO AND M. VOGT 169 
Formation of a Monolayer 
The first signs of the formation of a monolayer consisted of patches of polygonal epi- 
thelial-like cells and were usually observed 48 hours after the preparation of the cultures. 
These patches originated mainly from the cell clusters present in the original suspension. The 
time required for the cell patches to fuse and to form a continuous cell layer, containing ap- 
proximately 2 M l0 s cells, varied from 3 to 7 days. The monolayers of the kidney cultures were 
always formed by polygonal cells, independently of the the time required for their formation. 
In the case of testes however, only the fast developing cultures formed cellular sheets similar 
to those of the kidneys; slow developing testis cultures contained mostly elongated cells of 
fibroblastic appearance. 
Plating of the Virus 
Cultures showing a continuous cell layer were washed twice with 2 ml. of PBS. After re- 
moving the last washing fluid, a volume of 0.3 ml. of virus suspension in PBS, at the appro- 
priate dilution, was pipetted onto the cell layer. After 30 minutes' incubation at 37°C. to 
permit adsorption of the virus onto the cells, the infected cultures were covered with 3 mI. of 
melted (at 43°C.) agar mixture (agar overlay); the cultures were then kept at room tempera- 
ture for about 10 minutes to allow the agar to solidify, and were finally placed in an incubator 
supplied with the CO.e-air mixture. 
Virus 
Type 1, Brunhilde strain (SC-1949 pool), of poliomyelitis virus, kindly supplied by Dr. 
C. F. Pait, was used in the majority of the experiments. The virus was supplied as a 20 per 
cent suspension of spinal cord of rhesus monkey in distilled water (4). In a number of experi- 
ments, Type 1 virus obtained from passage through the monolayer kidney cultures was used. 
Type 2, Yale-SK strain, and Type 3, Leon strain, were kindly supplied by Dr. J. L. Melnick 
in form of tissue culture supernatants. 
Preparation of Virus Stocks 
Cultures showing a continuous cell layer were washed and infected as described in the sec- 
tion Plating of the Virus. Instead of the 3 ml. of agar overlay, 3 ml. of Earle's saline containing 
20 per cent embryo extract was added to each Yetri dish, which was then incubated in an in- 
cubator continuously supplied with the CO2-air mixture. The supernatants were collected 
when the cells began to lose their attachment to the glass, usually 24 hours after infection. 
Anlisera 
Normal monkey serum and type-specific poliomyelitis antisera were kindly supplied by 
Dr. C. F. Pait. The specific antisera used were: Type 1--Pool A-453, 1/23/50, and Type 2-- 
Pool A-300, 6/20/49. (4) 
RESULTS 
Characteristics of Plaque Formation 
In an infected culture, both the aspect and the number of plaques varied 
with the time of incubation. The formation of plaques with poliomyelitis virus 
Type 1 and Type 2 could be seen macroscopically 24 hours after infection. In 

===== PAGE 4 =====
170 PLAQUE FORMATION AND POLIOMYELITIS VIRUSES 
oblique light, against a dark background, the plaques stand out as small, 
brilliant areas. After 48 hours, they were best seen against a clear, green back- 
ground; they appeared as round, uncolored areas contrasting with the red 
color of the surrounding living cells, stained intravitally with neutral red 
(Fig. 1). At this time, the diameter of the plaques varies from 1 to 3 mm. 
During subsequent incubation, the plaques increased progressively in size 
until they became confluent. On a given plate, the number of plaques approxi- 
mately doubled between the 1st and 4th day, and remained constant thereafter. 
FIG. 1. Plaques of poliomyelitis virus, Type 1, on monolayer monkey kidney cultures, 72 
hours after infection. The plate to the right was infected with double the amount of virus. 
Approximately natural size. 
Plaques of Type 3 virus appeared only after 48 hours, and increased in number 
up to the 5th day. Owing to their later appearance, plaques of Type 3 virus 
were on corresponding days always smaller than those produced by the other 
two types. 
When comparing plaque formation on kidney and testis cultures, it was 
observed that kidney cultures were all equally and highly susceptible to the 
virus. In the case of testis cultures, however, the morphological differences 
between fast and slow growing cultures (see section Formation of a Monolayer) 
proved to be correlated with a difference in susceptibility of the two types of 
cultures: fast growing testis cultures were almost as susceptible as kidney 
cultures while slow growing testis cultures were much less susceptible to the 
virus. For this reason, all quantitative experiments have been done with 
kidney cultures, or fast growing testis cultures. 

===== PAGE 5 =====
R. DULBECCO AND M. VOGT 171 
The number of plaques produced by a given virus sample was reproducible 
(with the restriction just mentioned), and inversely proportional to the dilu- 
tion of the virus, provided the number of plaques per plate was sufficiently 
small (around 40 or less) to avoid an overlapping of plaques (Table I). The 
amount of virus capable of producing one plaque will be called a plaque-form- 
ing dose. 
TABLE I 
Proportionality between the Number of Plaques and the Concentration of Virus 
Each culture was infected with 0.i ml. of the appropriate virus dilution. 
No. of experi- 
ment 
Virus stock 
Monkey spinal cord 
suspension 
Monkey spinal cord 
suspension 
Plaque stock 2 
Plaque stock 2 
Liquid stock 2-1 
Rehfive 
concen- 
tration 
of virus 
1 
1 
No. of plaques on each plate 
69; 104; 132 
46; 62; 62;68 
47 
21; 25 
29; 53 
8; 12; 12; 17; 17; 18 
10; 36 
5; 5; 7; 11; 11; 22 
0;1;1;2;2;5;5;5;6;9 
18; 20; 31; 33 
8; 9; 9; 12; 13; 15; 15; 18 
I; 2; 3; 4; 4; 5; 5; 6; 6; 7; 7; 7; 
7; 7; 9; 12 
Aver- 
age Nro. p~te 
102 
60 
47 
23 
Calculated titer per ml, 
8.1 )< 10 6 
9.5 × l0 s 
7.5 X 105 
7.4 X 105 
2.5 X 105 
2.5 X 105 
1.2 X 10 l 
1.5 × 105 
1.6 X l0 s 
2.6 X 10 s 
2.5 × 108 
2.3 × 108 
Plaque formation with Type 1 virus could be prevented by pretreatment of 
the virus with specific Type 1 antiserum, whereas pretreatment with normal 
monkey serum or specific Type 2 antiserum would not prevent plaque forma- 
tion (Table II). This result shows that plaques are produced by a factor that 
has the same antigenic properties as the virus. 
The titer obtained by counting the plaque-forming doses was slightly higher 
than the infectivity titer obtained by monkey titration. Thus, the 20 per cent 
spinal cord suspension of Type 1 virus was found to have a plaque-forming 
titer of 7.4 X 106 plaque-forming doses per ml. Its PD~0 titer per one-half 
milliliter had been found to be 106.4 (4). Since a PDs0 corresponded to an aver- 
age of 0.7 infectious doses (as shown in the discussion), a titer of 10 s.4 PDb0 
corresponded to a titer of 1.75 X 105 infectious doses per 1/~ ml. (or 3.5 X 105 
infectious doses per ml.). 

===== PAGE 6 =====
172 PLAQUE 1~ORMATION AND POLIOMYELITIS VIRUSES 
The plaque titer was, therefore, slightly higher than the monkey infectivity 
titer. It has also been found that the plaque titer was somewhat higher than 
that obtained in roller tubes of monkey kidney (5). 
TABLE II 
Suppression of Plaque Formation by Type-Specific Antiserum 
The virus was incubated for 1 hour at 37°C. in serum diluted 1:20 in PBS; aliquots of 
0.I ml. of the mixtures were subsequently plated at the dilutions indicated. 
NO. of 
experi. meat Virus stock 
Monkey spinal cord 
suspension 
Plaque stock 1 
Plaque stock 2 
Type of serum 
Type 1 antiserum 
Type 2 antiserum 
Normal monkey se- 
rum 
Type 1 antiserum 
Normal monkey se- 
rum 
Type 1 antiserum 
Normal monkey se- 
rum 
Dilutit 
of viru $ertttl 
mixttu 
1 
10 
100 
10 
100 
10 
100 
1 
10 
5O 
5O 
2OO 
1 
10 
5O 
5O 
2OO 
No. of plaques on each plate 
40 
7 
> 100 
22 
0* 
6; 4~; 
0; o 
> 40; confluent 
18; 7 
0 
0; 0 
0; 0; 0 
Confluent; confluent 
68; confluent; confluent 
* The absence of plaques in this undiluted sample, in contrast to the presence of plaques 
in the 10 times more diluted sample, is due to the high concentration of antiserum carried 
over to the plate. 
~: In Experiments 7 and 8, aliquots of the higher dilutions were plated in duplicate or 
triplicate. 
Isolation of Virus from the Plaques and Determination of Its Characteristics 
The virus was recovered from a plaque by picking up with a Pasteur pipette 
an agar cylinder, 2 ram. in diameter, from the center of the plaque (6); the 
agar cylinder was suspended in 1 ml. of Earle's saline containing 20 per cent 
embryo extract and frozen; this preparation will be called "plaque suspension." 
Twenty suspensions from different plaques were assayed and found to contain 
from 10' to 106 plaque-forming doses. From each plaque suspension a "plaque 

===== PAGE 7 =====
R. DULBECC0 AND M. VOGT 173 
stock" was prepared as described under Methods. Since each plaque stock 
originated from a single virus particle (as proved in the Discussion), these 
stocks constitute the purest lines of virus presently available. The question of 
purity of these lines will be expanded further in the discussion. 
The virus originating within a plaque diffuses out, and may, therefore, con- 
taminate an adjacent plaque. An experiment was devised to determine the 
distance covered by the virus in diffusing away from a plaque. Several plates 
were infected with diluted Type 1 virus, so as to obtain very few plaques. 
One plate developed a single plaque. After 4 days of incubation, the plaque 
had a diameter of 5 ram. Agar cylinders were picked up from different regions 
on the plate: (1), from the center of the plaque; (2), at 6 taro.; (3), at 13 ram.; 
and (4), at 20 ram. from the center. All agar cylinders were suspended in 1 
ml. volume. The various suspensions were then assayed for virus, suspension 
(1) at a proper dilution, the others undiluted. The virus content of the sus- 
pensions was found to be: (1), 1.8 X 104; (2), 10; (3), no plaques in 0.6 ml. 
(the remaining 0.4 ml. was lost by contamination of a plate); (4), no plaques. 
It appears, therefore, that virus from a plaque is still present at a distance 
of 3 to 4 ram. from the rim of the plaque; its concentration decreases, however, 
very rapidly with the distance, as expected from the laws of diffusion. At a 
distance of 10 ram. or more from the rim, diffused virus is entirely absent. 
It is interesting that after 3 days the plaque reached the position of cylinder 
(3); two new agar cylinders were picked up at this time, contiguous to cylinders 
(2) and (3), respectively. Both of them now contained virus (about 104 plaque- 
forming doses). 
Several characteristics of the virus contained in a number of different 
plaque stocks were determined; i.e., the serological type of the virus, its patho- 
genicity for monkeys, and the type of plaques produced on replating. 
As can be seen from Experiments 7 and 8 in Table II, the plaque stocks 
studied were of the same serological type as the source material. 
The pathogenicity of the plaque stocks was determined by inoculating 
intracerebrally into cynomolgus monkeys aliquots of 0.2 to 0.4 ml. of six plaque 
stocks--two of which had been obtained after a second plaque passage. Two 
monkeys were used for each stock. Each monkey showed characteristic signs 
of poliomyelitis, with a flaccid paralysis between the 4th and 7th day. Since 
the original Br~mhilde stock, containing 3.5 X 105 infectious doses per ml., 
had been diluted before inoculation by a factor of 1.45 X 10 ~ in the case of 
the first passage stocks and by a factor of 4.3 X 10161 in the case of the second 
i These dilution factors arose in the following way: (a) first-passage stock: dilution of 
Brunhilde stock into the agar overlay of the first plate: 1.6 X 104; ~oo of the agar overlay 
picked and diluted 1:30 to make a stock; of this 0.2 ml. inoculated into the animal. (b) second 
passage stock: similar to the first passage stock, but with an additional dilution 1/~o 0 in re- 
plating the first plaque suspension, and 1/~0 o in the second picking; in addition the second 
plaque suspension was diluted ~oo instead of ~o to make a stock. 

===== PAGE 8 =====
174 PLAQUE FO~ATION AND POLIOMYELITIS VIRUSES 
passage stocks, the experiment proves that pathogenic virus was produced 
inside the plaques. 
To test whether the differences in plaque size that had been observed were 
hereditary with the virus responsible for them, stocks from large and small 
plaques were plated separately and scored for plaque size. The plaques pro- 
duced by stocks of both types were indistinguishable and showed again the 
same variability in plaque size. It was, therefore, concluded that differences 
in plaque size are non-hereditary. 
Part of the variability in plaque size can be attributed to differences in the 
time of adsorption of individual particles onto the cells of the same culture, 
as proved by the following experiment :- 
Four cultures were washed and infected; after 30 minutes' adsorption, 
two cultures were overlaid with agar while the remaining two cultures were 
washed by two changes of 2 ml. of PBS, so as to eliminate the majority of the 
free virus, and then overlaid with agar. All the plates were incubated. It was 
found that the washed cultures showed only one-third of the number of plaques 
present in the non-washed plates; this shows that two-thirds of the plaque- 
forming doses were adsorbed during the incubation of the plates, that is after 
the 30 minutes' adsorption period. 
However, this is not the only cause that produces a variability in the size 
of the plaques, since the plaques developing on the washed plates still showed 
differences in size. The other causes are, so far, unknown. 
Independent Infection of the Indi~yidual Cells in a Culture 
To show that all cells of a culture can be infected independently, the follow- 
ing experiment was performed. 
Cultures were infected with virus inocula of increasing concentration, 
overlayed after 30 minutes' adsorption with agar (from which the neutral 
red had been omitted), and incubated for 10 hours. At the end of this period, 
the cultures were stained with neutral red for 1 hour, and then observed 
microscopically. 
In cultures infected with high virus concentrations, most of the cells were 
unstained, whereas in cultures with low virus concentrations only a few cells 
had not taken up the stain. A count of the two classes of cells in several micro- 
scopic fields of the different cultures showed that the fraction of unstained 
cells increased proportionally to the concentration of the virus; they were 
therefore, the cells infected by the inoculum. Stained and unstained cells were 
randomly mixed. In cultures in which only few unstained cells were present, 
these were always single; patches of unstained cells, suggestive of units of 
infection containing many cells, were never found. 
Thus, the findings that at low virus concentrations infected cells were dis- 
tributed randomly and that at high concentrations (usually) all the cells 

===== PAGE 9 =====
R. DULBECCO AND M, VOGT 175 
showed signs of infection are evidence that in a monolayer culture individual 
cells can all be infected independently. 
Produaion of High Titer Stocks 
Monolayer kidney cultures lend themselves to the production of high titer 
stocks. The highest titers, ranging between 2 and 7 X l0 s plaque-forming 
doses per ml. supernatant, were obtained when the inocula were sufficiently 
large to infect almost every cell of a culture; i.e., contained approximately 
5 X 10 e plaque-forming doses. This was deduced from the following observa- 
tion. By using inocula of increasing concentration, the virus titer in the super- 
natant increased correspondingly, until a maximum was reached. The minimum 
number of plaque-forming doses required in the inoculum to obtain this maxi- 
mum virus titer was equivalent to two to three times the number of cells 
present in the culture (as determined by direct cell count). When such an inocu- 
lum was used, all the cells of a culture showed a complete degeneration ap- 
proximately at the same time (around 18 hours), whereas with lower inocula, 
many cells were at this time still apparently intact. Larger inocula did not 
increase the titer further. 
The highest concentration of the virus was obtained 24 hours after infection 
when all cells had degenerated and virus production had ceased. This last fact 
was shown by the following experiment:- 
The supernatant culture fluid was removed from a culture 24 hours after inoculation with 
an inoculum insuring infection of most of the cells; all the cells were degenerated but the 
majority was still sticking onto the glass. 3 ml. of fresh fluid was added to the culture, which 
was incubated for an additional period of 24 hours. At this time, a second supernatant was 
coUected. Upon assay it was found that the second supernatant had only ~0 the titer of the 
first, which could be entirely accounted for by the residual first supematant. 
Since a fully grown culture contained approximately two millions of cells, 
each cell in cultures giving high titer supernatants produced (on the average) 
an amount of virus ranging between 300 and 1000 plaque-forming doses. 
DISCUSSION 
The present work shows that plaque formation by poliomyelitis viruses of 
the three types has been obtained on monolayer cultures of monkey kidney 
and, in the case of Type 1, of monkey testis. Kidney cultures, however, proved 
preferable due to their uniform susceptibility. Other tissues might lend them- 
selves equally well to plaque production. Among these the HeLa cells derived 
from a human cancer, might be a material of choice for future work, since 
these cells grow on glass, are perpetuated easily, and show necrosis under the 
influence of the poliomyelitis viruses (7). 
The production of plaques with poliomyelitis viruses offers two points of 
interest: a theoretical and a practical one. 

===== PAGE 10 =====
50 
40 
r, 30 
[2o 
Z 
PLAQUE FORMATION AND POLIOMYELITIS VIRUSES 
From a theoretical standpoint, the formation of plaques affords the strongest 
evidence that a single virus particle is sufficient to initiate the infection of a 
cell. We will define later the characteristics of this particle. 
The proof that a single virus particle is sufficient for infection is based on 
the results of the dilution experiments reported in Table II and Fig. 2, which 
show an accurately linear relationship between the number of plaques and the 
virus concentration within each experiment:-- 
176 
I I I, ,! I I , I 
I 2 3 4 5 6 7 i~t~tive virus concentration 
Fro. 2. Linear relationship between the number of plaques and the virus concentration- 
The points represent the data of Experiments 2, 3, 4 and 5 of Table L Similar symbols belong 
to the same experiment. The points surrounded by circles represent the number of plaques at 
the highest virus concentration within each of the four experiments; for convenience, the val- 
ues for the corresponding relative virus concentrations were chosen arbitrarily, so as to bring 
the four points onto the same llne. The relative virus concentrations of the other points within 
each experiment correspond to the respective dilution factors as given in Table I. 
Proof That a Linear Relationship Indicates a One-Partide Pkenomenon.--A mono- 
layer culture of cells can be ideally subdivided into a large number, N, of cellular 
units, which could be single cells or groups of cells. We now adsorb v virus particles 
at random onto the cell-layer; the average number of virus particles per cellular unit is, 
therefore, N" If the adsorption of one particle on a cellular unit is suflficient to produce 
a plaque (one-partide hypothesis), the number of plaques (Pl) is given, according to 
the Poisson distribution by: 
Pl = N (1 - e -='/~') (1) 

===== PAGE 11 =====
R. DULBECCO AND M, VOGT 177 
in which a is a constant defining the efficiency of the system. The number N, of cellular 
units, is equal to the number of the cells in a culture; this is inferred from the fact 
that all the cells of a culture can be infected at appropriate virus concentration and 
infection of individual cells occurs independently, as shown under Results. N is, 
therefore, of the order of 2 X 106. 
Since we are interested in the case in which only a relatively small number (less 
av 
than 50) plaques is produced; i.e., in which ~ is very small, we can approximate 
equation 1 to 
PI =. av (1 a) 
A linear relation between number of plaques and virus concentration is, therefore, 
expected. 
It has now to be shown that such linear relation cannot be obtained under other 
conditions. Let us consider therefore as second hypothesis, the ease that more titan 
one particle per cellular unit is required to form a plaque, for instance, at least t~o 
particles. In this ease, according to the Poisson distribution, the number of plaques 
is given by 
which, for small ~, approximates to 
(a~)2 
et = ~ • (2 a) N 
The number of plaques would now be proportional to the square of the virus con- 
centration. As shown in Fig. 3, the curve drawn according to equation (2 a) does 
not fit the experimental points. 
If a higher number of virus particles per cellular unit were required, the number of 
plaques would be proportional to a correspondingly higher power of the virus con- 
centration; the respective curve would fit the experimental points even less well. 
Let us turn to a third hypothesis. It has been concluded that for some virus-cell 
systems the quantitatively different effects of different doses of viruses can be at- 
tributed to a variation in the regional susceptibility of the hosts, and that the relation 
between virus concentration and effect could be best explained by assuming that the 
logarithm of the minimal effective concentration per cellular unit is normally dis- 
tributed. Under this assumption, the dependence of the number of plaques on virus 
concentration would be described by an integrated normal distribution (8, 9). This 
assumption is rather vague as long as the three parameters of the normal distribution 
are chosen at will; i.e., the number of cellular units, the concentration of virus at 
which 50 per cent of the cellular units develop lesions, and the variance of the distri- 
bution. By arbitrarily assuming appropriate values of the three parameters, the re- 
lation between virus concentration and plaque number predicted by this theory be- 

===== PAGE 12 =====
178 PLAQUE FORMATION AND POLIOMYELITIS ¥IRUSES 
comes nearly linear over certain ranges; these segments of the curve could not be 
experimentally differentiated from a true straight line. To test the hypothesis prop- 
erly, the three parameters must be determined on the basis of the experimental data. 
In our case, this can be done since we know the number of the cellular units. We have 
already shown that this number is of the order of 2 X 10 e. The other two parameters 
are determined from any two experimental points of the curve. 
The points used were the following: (1) the point at which the fraction of infected 
cells per culture was 0.83 (measured by microscopic count in the experiment showing 
50 
40 
3C 
E 
z 
ll . I I 
I 2 3 4 5 6 7 Relative virus concen~ra[ra~i0n 
Fro. 3. Comparison of experimental data with hypothesis 2. The curve has been drawn ac- 
cording to equation (2 a). The points surrounded by circles have been placed arbitrarily on 
the curve. The relative virus concentrations of the other points correspond, as in Fig. 2, to 
the respective dilution factors. Points of the same experiment are connected by lines. 
the independent infection of the cells); (2) the point at which the fraction of infected 
ceils per culture was 5 X 10 -r, corresponding to one infected cell in a culture (de- 
termined by the development of one plaque per plate as average). On the normal 
probability curve, these points lie at +0.95 and -4.9 standard units, respectively, 
from the center of the curve. Since the virus concentrations used to obtain the two 
points consisted of 4 X 106 plaque-forming doses and of one plaque-forming dose, 
respectively, the ratio between the corresponding virus concentrations was 10 s'~. 
Hence, 5.85 standard units corresponded to 6.6 logl0 units of virus concentration, and 
the standard deviation of our curve was equal to 1.12 loglo units of virus concentra- 
tion. The center of the curve corresponded to a virus concentration of 105"u. 
All the parameters of the normal curve being thus determined, we can now predict 
the dependence on the concentration of the virus of the number of plaques, for the 
experimental case that the number of plaques is less than 50 (corresponding to a 
distance of -3.4 and more standard units from the center of the curve). Fig. 4 shows 

===== PAGE 13 =====
R. DULBECCO AND M. VOGT 179 
that there is a strong disagreement between the theoretical curve and the experi- 
mental points; the third hypothesis can, therefore, be discarded. 
Our data, thus, conclusively prove that a single virus particle is sufficient 
to produce a plaque, and that the unit of cellular infection is a single cell. 
50 
40 
30 
~20 
I0 
,,D 
Standard , units I I I 'I I 
-490 "460 "4.40 -4.:~5 -4.10 
2.0xlO "s- 
I.OxlO - 
2 4 6 8 I0 V~ru$ concentration, proque-forrning doses 
Fio. 4. Comparison of experimental data with hypothesis 3, that the number of plaques 
is proportional to an integrated error function of the logarithm of the virus concentration. 
The center of this curve corresponds to 10 s.s4 plaque-forming doses of virus, the standard 
deviation to 1.12 log10 ratio of virus concentrations. In the figure the concentration is repre- 
scnted in a linear scale. The distances from the center of the curve in standard units are given 
in the upper scale. The number of plaque-forming doses, given in the lower scale, is equal to 
10s.s4+ =t~.a~ unit, × I.'~. For additional information, see text. The number of plaques 
(left scale) is given by the product of the probability (right scale) times the number of cells 
in the culture (2 X 109. The experimental points have been placed as in Fig. 3. 
Having arrived at this point, it is now possible to define properly the char- 
acteristics of the virus particle detected by a plaque. Owing to its all-or-none 
effect, it has the character of a particle. It corresponds to a unit of the virus 
which is not further subdivisible at high dilution. From the property by which 
it is recognized, we call it a plaque-forming particle. We do not know its 
morphological or genetic properties. It might be a single elementary body, or 
a clump of them, provided that the clump persists indefinitely at high dilution. 

===== PAGE 14 =====
180 PLAQUE FORMATION AND POLIOMYELITIS VIRUSES 
A plaque-forming dose contains at least one plaque-forming particle. It may 
contain more than one if the coefficient a of equation (1) is less than unity. 
The finding that the plaque-forming titer of a given virus stock is very 
similar to its monkey-infectious titer (see under Results) is a strong indication 
that also for the infection of the monkey one single virus particle is sufficient. 
A PD60, which corresponds to a probability of infection of 0.5, can be, therefore, 
expressed in "monkey-infectious doses," one PDl0 corresponding to 0.7 in- 
fectious doses according to the Poisson distribution (e -~.~ = 0.5). 
We want now to discuss briefly two conditions which apparently contradict 
the general conclusion that a single virus particle is sufficient to produce 
infection. 
On one hand, a virus sample containing a single plaque-forming dose may 
actually contain more than one physical virus particle. This may occur for a 
variety of reasons, which do not invalidate the general conclusions: some of the 
physical particles may be non-infectious, or they may give rise to non-infectious 
progeny, or they may be infectious but have a small probability of coming 
into contact with a cell under the conditions of the experiment. The last condi- 
tion may explain the slight differences between plaque-forming dose and 
monkey-infectious dose. 
On the other hand, a cell may well be infected by more than one plaque- 
forming particle. It will be shown in a subsequent article that this has been 
accomplished with the virus of Western equine encephalomyelitis on a sus- 
pension of susceptible cells (10). Under the conditions of plaque formation 
however in which less than 100 virus particles come into contact with more 
than a million ceils, the probability that a cell will be infected with more than 
one particle is entirely negligible. Under the circumstances outlined a plaque 
is, therefore, always initiated by a single plaque-forming particle. 
The practical interest of the production of plaques is a consequence of their 
properties, as defined in the preceding theoretical discussion, and consists in 
the fact that they offer a new, sensitive, and reproducible method of titration, 
and a reliable method for isolating pure lines of the poliomyelitis viruses. 
Justification of using the plaque technique as a method of titration is based 
on the following experimental results: (1) the plaques are due to the specific 
action of the virus; (2) the number of plaques is closely reproducible and pro- 
portional to the concentration of the virus, provided the plates are not too 
crowded; (3) the method appears to be slightly more sensitive than the titra- 
tion in monkeys or in roller tube tissue cultures. From a practical point of 
view, there should not be more than 40 to 50 plaques per plate, so that the 
loss by overlapping of plaques be less than 10 per cent. 
The overlapping of plaques can be avoided by using an inoculum producing 
a small number of plaques, as seen from the following calculation:-- 

===== PAGE 15 =====
R. DULBECCO AND M. VOGT 181 
A distance of 3 mm. between the centers of the two neighboring plaques is approxi- 
mately the minimum distance required to recognize the separate origin of two plaques. 
The probability that two or more plaques originate within a circle of 3 mm. diameter 
can be calculated from equation (2), in which, now v is the number of virus particles 
on a plate and n the number of non-overlapping 3 ram. circles on the bottom of a 
60 mm. Petri dish; i.e. ffi 270. The total number of plaques is given by equation (1). 
Using these equations, it can be seen that 100 plaque-forming particles on a plate 
produce 84 plaques, 15 of which are of multiple origin; 50 particles on a plate produce 
46 plaques, 4 of which axe of multiple origin; and 10 paxtides on a plate produce 10 
plaques, with practically none multiple (only one multiple plaque in 10 such plates). 
Using as maximum 40 to 50 plaques per plate, the plaque technique com- 
pares favorably with the roller tube technique as assay method.~-fifteen to 
thirty cultures prepared from one monkey kidney allow an accurate count of 
approximately 600 to 1200 plaques, which are statistically equivalent to about 
1200 to 2400 roller tubes~ 
The production of pure virus strains has been obtained by Burnet el a/. (1I) 
and by Hirst and Gotlieb (12) in influenza virus by egg passages at limiting 
dilutions, and by Downie and Haddock (13) in vaccinia by resuspending pocks 
developing on the chorio-allantoic membrane of the chicken embryo. 
The recovery of virus from single plaques provides another method for 
virus purification. Purity of the plaque virus is assured if the following three 
requirements are fulfilled: (1) absence of plaques of multiple origin due to 
secondary overlapping; (2) no contamination of the plaque picked by virus 
diffusing from an adjacent plaque, or (3) by residuat non-adsorbed seed virus. 
The conditions fulfilling requirements (1) and (2) have already been dis- 
cussed; they consist in the use of plates having less than 10 plaques, and in the 
picking of plaques at a distance of at least 10 ram. from the margin of an ad- 
jacent plaque. Requirement (3) can be fulfilled by washing the cell layer free 
of unadsorbed virus at the end of the adsorption period. It should be noted, in 
addition, that possibly contaminating virus particles could be eliminated by 
using two or more serial plaque passages. After fulfilling these three require- 
ments, the purity of the plaque virus is limited only by the possible existence 
of heterogeneous components within the same plaque-forming virus particle. 
SUMMARY 
Plaques have been produced with the three types of poliomyelitis viruses on 
monolaycr tissue cultures of monkey kidney and monkey testis. The number 
of plaques was proportional to the concentration of the virus. Each plaque 
originates, therefore, from a single virus particle, defined as the virus unit 
that is unseparable by dilution. The plaques are due to the specific action of 
the virus since they are suppressed by type-specific antiserum. 

===== PAGE 16 =====
182 PLAQU'E ~OILMATION AND POLIOMYELITIS VIRUSES 
Pure virus lines were established by isolating the virus population produced 
in single plaques. These derived virus lines had the same morphological, 
serological, and pathogenic properties as the parent strain. 
High titer virus stocks, with titers up to 7 X l0 s plaque-forming particles 
per ml., were obtained. 
Grateful acknowledgment is made to Dr. C. F. Pait for numerous discussions and for per- 
forming the intmcerebral inoculation of the monkeys; to Mrs. Kathy Hayden and to Mrs. 
Patrida Knuth for their valuable technical assistance. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
1. Dulbecco, R., Proc. Nat. Acad. Sc., 1952, 38, 747. 
2. Robbins, F. C., Enders, J. F., and Weller, T. H., Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. and Me~,, 
1950, 75, 370. 
3. Earle, W. R., J. Nat. Cancer Imt., 1943, 4, 165. 
4. Committee on Typing, The National Foundation for Infantile Paralysis, Inc, 
Am. J. Hyg., 1951, 54, 191. 
5. ¥oungner, J, S. personal communication. 
6. Anderson, T. F., J. Ba~t., 1948, 55, 651. 
7. Scherer, W. F., Syverton, J. T., and Gey, G. 0., l. Exp. Med., 1953, 97, 695. 
8. Bryan, W. R., and Beard, J. W., Y.: Infect. Dis., 1940, 6"/, 5. 
9. Kleezkowski, A., J. Gen. Microbiol. 1950, 4, 53. 
10. Dulbecco, R., and Vogt, M., J. Exp, Med., 1954, 99, 183. 
11. Burnet, F. M., Fraser, P. E., and Lind, P. E., Nature, 1953, 171, 163. 
12. Hirst, G. K., and Gotlieb, T., Y. Exp. Med. 1953, 98, 53. 
13. Downie, A. W., and Haddock, D. W., Proc. 6th Internat. Cong. Microbiol., Rome, 
September 7-11, 1953, 2, 32. 
