
===== PAGE 1 =====
Proceedings 
of the 
Society 
for 
Experimental Biology and Medicine 
VOL. 73 JANUARY, 19 5 0 No. 1 
SECTION MEETINGS 
CLEVELAND 
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA 
MINNESOTA 
NEW YORK 
Western Reserve University 
George Washington University 
University of Minnesota 
New York Academy of Medicine 
November 11 and 14, 1949 
December 1, 1949 
December 22, 1949 
December 14, 1949 
Nutrition of Animal Cells in Tissue Culture. I. Initial Studies on a 
Synthetic Medium."? (17557) 
JOSEPH F. MORGAN, HELEN J. MORTON, AND RAYMOND C. PARKER. 
From the Connaught Medical Research Labora.torias, University of Toronto. 
Over the past 30 years, the nutritive 
media that have been employed for the 
propagation of animal cells in tissue cul- 
ture have bmeen derived, directly or in- 
directly, from the organism and have con- 
sisted of blood plasma, blood serum, body 
exudates and extracts of various tissues and 
organs. But the complexity and. varia- 
bility of these natural substrates has made 
it allmost ismpossible to employ them in 
experiments designed to determine the sub- 
stances that are actually utilized by the cells 
for survival and' multiplication. From time 
to time, ,attempts have been made to devise 
* This investigation was supported, in part, by 
grants from the National Cancer Institute of 
Canada, and the Ontario Cancer Treatment and 
Research Foundation. 
t Grateful acknowledgment is made to Mrs. 
M. G. Pearce and Mrs. C. J. Porter for technical 
assistance. 
nutritive media comprised of chemically- 
known ingredients. Thus, Vogelaar and 
Erl'ichman ( 1 ) , Baker (2), and Baker and 
Ebeling (3), have reported feeding sulutions 
for fibroblasts, epithelial cells and blood 
macrophages. These media consisted in part 
of chemically-defined substances, but the ad- 
dition of serum or other natural substrates 
was necessary for cell multiplication and sur- 
vival. Fischer and his associates (4) employed 
dialyzed plasma and dialyzed chick embryo 
extract as a base and devised supplementary 
solutions consisting of compounds of known 
1. Vogelaar, J. P. M., and Erlichman, E.; An%. J. 
2. Baker, L. E., Science, 1936, v83: 605. 
3. Baker, L. E., and Ebeling, A. H., J. Exp. 
Med., 1939, v69, 365. 
4. Fischer, A., Astrup, T., Ehrensvard, G., and 
Oehlenschlager, V., PROC. XOC. EXP. BIOL. AND 
MED., 1948, 1767, 40. 
Cancer, 1933, v18, 28. 
===== PAGE 2 =====
2 SYNTHETIC FEEDIKG MIXTURE FOR TISSUE CULTURES 
biological importance to replace the accessory 
growth factors removed during dialysis. 
White( 5) reported a culture fluid consisting of 
constituents of known composition that sup- 
ported the life of relatively large masses of 
chick embryo tissue for several weeks. It was 
found by Jacolby and Darke( 6) , however, 
that it was necessary to add serum to White‘s 
mixture in order to support ithe life and activi- 
ty of pure cultures of blood macrophages. 
It is the purpose of the present communi- 
cation to report the first of a series of studies 
made in this laboratory over the past 2 years 
in an attempt to devise a synthetic medium 
of chemically-known composition that would 
promote continuous cell multiplication of 
small amounts of tissue in the absence of 
blood. serum and embryo extract. Although 
a completeiy adequate synthetic mixture has 
not yet been achieved, the results thus far 
obtained are sufficiently encouraging to justify 
the present report. 
Materials and Methods. *4ll cultures were 
preparedl from the leg muscle of ll-day-old 
chick embryos. After the tissue had been 
chopped with cataract knives into extremely 
fine fragments, and the fragments had been 
washed with Earle’s modification of Tyrode’s 
solution(7), very small amounts of the re- 
sulting suspension were transferred with a 
pipette to the inner surface of standard pyrex 
test tubes ( 18 >( 150 mm) . The culture fluid 
(2 ml) was then placed in the bottom of the 
tubes, care being taken to avoid wetting the 
tissue, the pH was adjusted to 7.2 with a gas 
mixture consisting of 8% COZ, 21% 02 and 
7 1 % K2, and the tubes were tightly stoppered. 
It was found that a period of 1 hour was 
required for the tissue to become firmly at- 
tached to the glass surface of the tubes before 
the fluid medium could be washed over it. 
As soon as the tissues were flooded with the 
culture fluid, the tubes were inserted in an al- 
most horizontal position in a rotating drum( 8) 
at 38°C. 
5. White, P. R., Growfh, 1946, v10, 931. 
6. Jacoby, P.: and Darke, 8. J., Snture, 1948, 
7. Earle, W. R., J. A-at. Cancer Insf., 1943, v4, 
8. Gey, G. O., Am. J. Cancer, 1933, v17, 752. 
rlG1, 768. 
165. 
,411 cultures received a preliminary feeding 
mixture containing naturally-occurring ingre- 
dients (horse serum and embryo extract) when 
first made and were left in the rotating drum 
for an initial period of 3 to 5 days. At the 
end of this time, they were examined micro- 
scopically and any unsuitable cultures were 
discarded. The remaining cultures were di- 
vided into groups of 5 or more, and the pre- 
liminary feeding mixture was replaced by 
various synthetic mixtures. These mixtures 
were changed 3 times a week. The cultures 
were examined microscopically at frequent 
intervals and careful record was made of the 
development of new tissue, breakdown of 
the original tissue, and the general appear- 
ance of the individual cells. Cultures were 
maintained in the synthetic mixtures until 
living cells were no longer apparent. The 
average survival time of the cultures in each 
group of a series (Table I) was considered 
to be a rough indication of the suitability of 
the experimental media. Th’roughout the ex- 
periments, certain cultures were continued, in 
the preliminary feeding mixture (containing 
<horse serum and embryo extract) as positive 
controls, and in Earle’s solution alone as nega- 
tive controls. 
By careful refinements of technique, it was 
found possible to decrease progressively the 
amount of #embryo tissue added to the roller 
tubes. In all of the experiments to be re- 
ported, cultures were made with the min<imum 
amount of tissue (Fig. 1) that would yield 
extensive cell growth. 
The non-synthetic, preliminary feeding mix- 
ture consisted of 4 parts horse serum, 6 parts 
FIG. 1. 
Portion of 18 X 150 mm 
amount of tissue employed 
typical culture ; photographed 
tion. X1. 
test tube showing 
in preparation of 
after 18 hr incuba- 

===== PAGE 3 =====
SYNTHETIC FEEDING MIXTURE FOR TISSUE CULTURES 3 
Earle's solution, and final concentrations of 
1 % chick embryu extract (9) (in Earle's solu- 
tian) and 0.002% phenol red. 
The components of the synthetic media 
were of the highest grade obtainable com- 
mercially and were employed without further 
purification. It was found !most convenient 
to prepare a number of basic stock solutions 
and to combine these in various proportions. 
Sol. A : Z-Arginine monohydrochloride, 14.0 
mg ; l-histidine monuhydrochloride, 4.0 mg; 
Llysine monohydrochloride, 14.0 mg ; dZ-tryp- 
topham, 4.0 mg; dl-phenylalanine, 10.0 mg; 
dZ-methionhe, 6.0 mg; dZ-serine, 10.0 mg; 
dl-thrmnine, 12.0 mg; dl-leucine, 24.0 mg; 
dl-isoleucine, 8.0 mg; dZ-valine, 10.0 mg; dl- 
glutamic acid monohydrate, 30.0 mg; dl- 
aspartic acid, 12 .O mg ; dl-a-alanine, 10.0 mg ; 
Ziproline, 8.0 mg; l-hydroxyproline, 2.0 mg; 
glycine, 10.0 mg; Eglutam'ine, 20.0 mg; so- 
daium acetate, 16.3 mg. These ingredients were 
dsissolved in 100 ml of dwble-strength kle's 
solution. 
Sol. B: Z-Tyrosine, 20 mg; Z-cystine, 
100 mg. These substances were dissolved 
with gentle heating in 100 ml of 0.075 N HCl. 
.Sot. C: Niacin, 25.0 mg; niacin amide, 
25.0 mg; pyridoxine hydrochloride, 25.0 mg; 
pyridoxal hydrochloride, 25.0 mg ; thiamin hy- 
drrochloride, 10.0 mg; riboflavin, 10.0 mg; 
calcium pantothenate, 10.0 mg ; i-inositd, 50.0 
mg; p-aminolbenzoic acid, 50 mg; choline 
chloride, 500.0 mg ; glass-distilled water to 
200 ml. 
Sol. D: Cysteine hydruchloride, 100.0 mg; 
glutathione, 50.0 mg; ascorbic acid, 50.0 mg; 
glass-distilled water to 100 ml. A fresh solu- 
tion was prepared each month. 
Sol. E: &-Biotin, 10.0 mg; glass-distilled 
watler to 100 ml. 
Sol. F: Fdic acid, 10.0 )mg; Earle's solu- 
tion to 100 ml. 
Sol. G: Vitamin A, 10.0 mg; ethyl alcohol 
(950/,), 1.0 ml; Tween 80 (5% aqueous mlu- 
tion), 10.0 ml; (glass-distilled water to 100 ml. 
A fresh stock solution was prepared each 
month. 
Sol. H: Calciferul (vit. DZ), 10.0 mg; 
9. Morgan, J. F., and Parker, R. C., PRW. SOC. 
En. BIOL. AND MED., 1949, v71, 665. 
ethyl alcohol (95%), 1.0 ml; Tween 80 (5% 
aqueous solution), 10.0 ml; glass-distilled 
water to 100 ml. 
Sol. I: Disodium a-tocopherol phosphate,# 
10.0 mg; glass-distilled water to 100 ml. 
Sol. J: Menadione (vit. K), 10.0 mg; glass- 
distilled water to 100 ml. 
Sol. K: Cholesterol, 10.0 mg; ethyl alcohol 
(95%), 10.0 ml; Tween 80 (5% aqueous so- 
lution), 10.0 ml; glass-distilled water to 100 
ml. 
Sol. L: Adenine sulfate, 500.0 mg; glass-dis- 
tilled water to 100 ml. 
Sol. 34: Guanine hydrochloride, 10.0 mg; 
xanthine, 10.0 mg; hpxanb$hine, 10.0 mg; 
thymine, 10.0 mg; uracil, 10.0 mg. These 
substances were dissolved in 100 ml glass- 
distilled water with the addition of 0.35 ml 
concentrated NH4OH. 
Sol. N: d-Kihse, 1W.O mg; d-2-desoxy- 
ribose, 100.0 mg; glass-distilled water to 100 
ml. A 1.0 ml amount of this solution was in- 
corporated in each liter of Solution A. 
Sol. 0: Adenylic acid (from muscle), 100.0 
mg; glass-distilled water to 100 ml. A 4.0 d 
portion of this solution was inmr+prated in: 
each liter of Solution A. 
Sol. P: Adenosinetriphosphate (dibarium 
salt), 67.6 mg. This substance was dissolved 
in 50 ml of 0.01N El. The barium was 
precipitated by the addition of a slight excess 
of saturated Na2S04 solution, removed by 
centrifuging, and the clear supernatant was 
diluted to 100 ml with glass-distilled water. 
A fresh solution was prepared. each, week. 
Sol. Q: Fe(N0&.9H20, 14.5 mg; glass- 
distilled water to 100 d. 
Stock solutions A, B, K, L, M, P and, Q 
were employed without further dilution So- 
lutions C, G, H and J were diluted 1:10 in 
glass-distilled water before use. Solutions D, 
E, F and I were diluted 1 : 100 in glassdis- 
tilled water. 
All solutions used in the prwaration of the 
synthetic mixtures were sterilized by passage 
through UF fritted glass filters (Corning). 
Stock solutions and the combined mixtures 
were stored in low-actinic glassware. The 
$ Obtained through the courtesy of Dr. J. G. 
Baxter, Distillation Products, fnc., Rochester, N.Y. 
===== PAGE 4 =====
4 SYNTHETIC FEEDING MIXTURE FOR TISSUE CULTURES 
TABLE I. 
-%wage Survival Time of Chick EinbrJ-o Roller-tube Cultures in 6 of the 199 Synthetic 
Mixtures That Were Tested. 
Mixture No. of Total No. of Ayg survivsl 
NO. Ingredients experiments cultures" (days 1 
Balanced 
salt 
mixture 
22 
81 
88 
148B 
199 
Esrle 's modification (7) of 6 
Tyrode's solutiou (incor- 
parated in all subsequent 
mixtures) 
Amiiio-acid mixture 5 
Misture Xo. 22 + vitaxiiiiis 5 
and Tween 80 
Mixture Xo. 81 + purines, 
Misture No. 88 + ATP, 
5 
11 y r iniidinea and choles t er 01 
adenylic acid, sodium ace- 
tate, glutamine, ribose, and 
desoxyribose 
12 
Misture No. 148B + 
ferric nitrate 
11 
23 6.6 
23 14.5 
18 16.8 
22 23.4 
'70 28.0 
GO 33.0t 
* ApproxiinatelF 3.000 cultures mere used to test all of the mixtures Btudied. 
t A few cultures in this misture hare survived beyond 70 days. 
majority of these solutions were kept at 4"C, 
but certain stock solutions. e.g. adenine: cho- 
lesterol, tyrosine and cystine, which tended 
to form precipitates in the refrigerator, were 
stored at room temperature. 
In thae preparation of the synthetic mix- 
tures, 25 ml of the amino acid basal mixture 
(Solution A) were taken, and to this were 
added appropriate volumes of the other stock 
solutions. Sufficient glass-distilled water was 
then addled to bring the total volume to 50 ml. 
The isotonicity of the media was confirmed by 
freezing-point determinations. Each new in- 
gredient, or group of ingredients, added to 
&he basal solution was first studied over a 
wicie range of concentrations to detect pos- 
sible toxic effects, and was finally incorpor- 
ated in the mixture at a level that was either 
beneficial or, at least! non-toxic. 
Experimental. Amino acids. Preliminary 
experiments were carried out in which an acid 
hydrolyzate of casein, fortified with trypto- 
phane, served as the sole source of nutrient. 
This solution proved to be completely inade- 
quate,,since it supported cell life for only 5 
to 7 days, An amino acid mixture was then 
prepared, from pure constituents and was made 
up in proportions based on analyses of tissue 
proteins(l0). This mixture was tested at 
several concentrations over the range of 500 
to 50 mg/100 ml total amino acids. A level of 
100 mg/lBO ml was found to be most suitable. 
At this concentration, cultures remained alive 
for an average period of 14 days (Table I), 
while at levels above and- below this amount 
the duration of life was mmewhat shorter. 
Vitamins. The bad amino acid mixture 
was next supplemented by the addition of 
vitamins (Solutions C to J). These were 
tested over a wide range of concentrations, 
some singly and some in groups. The addi- 
tion of vitamins was found to improve the 
appearance of the individual cells, but was 
not observed to increase the amount of new 
tissue. 
In these early vitamin experiments, con- 
siderable difficulty was encountered with 
vitamins A and D. "he stock solutions of 
these substances were madie up in 95% ethyl 
alcohol, and the vitamins tenddl to precipitate 
out when they were added to the aqueous basal 
mixture. It was also observed that the pres- 
ence of more than a trace of these solutions 
10. Block, R. J., and Bolling, D., The Amino 
Acid Composition of Proteins and Foods, Spring- 
field, Ill., Thomas, 1945. 
===== PAGE 5 =====
SYNTHETIC FEEDING MIXTURE FOR TISSUE CULTURES 5 
markedly decreased the survival period of the 
cultures. This ,was attrhted to the toxic 
effect of ethyl alcohol upon the tissue cells. 
Tzeieens. The surface active agents of the 
Tween series were next investigated as a 
possible means of supplying the tissues with 
a water-soluble source of fatty acid. Ex- 
tensive experiments, to be published separate- 
ly, have established that concentrations rang- 
ing from 0.005 to 0.0005% were suitable for 
use in the cultures. Since it was considered 
possilble that the cells might require a source 
of unsaturated fatty acid, it was decided to 
incorporate Tween 80 (containing oleic acid) 
in all subsequent synthetic mixtures. The 
surface activity of this compound was also 
utilized to dissolve fat-soluble compounds. It 
was found that if vitamin A, vitamin D and 
cholesterol were first dissolved in a minimal 
amount of 95% ethyl alcohol, and Tween 80 
was added subsequently (Solutions G, H, R) , 
these substances remained in solution and did 
not precipitate even in high dilution with dis- 
tilled water. 
The addition of vitamins A and D, in Tween 
80, to the synthetic mixture was found to 
prolong the survival time of the cultures and 
to improve the appearance of the cells. 
Whether this beneficial effect can be attribu- 
ted tlo the Tween 80 or to the elimination of 
all but minute traces of alcohol from the 
media has not yet been established. 
Nucleic Acid Constituents. Since the syn- 
thetic mixture now containled amino acids, 
vitamins and a source of fatty acid, attention 
was next directed to the constituents of nucleic 
acid, with particular emphasis upon the purine 
and pyrimidine bases. Adenine sulfatse was 
not found to exert any marked effect when 
tested alone at concentrations from 10 to 
0.1 mg,,' 100 ml. A purine and pyrimidine so- 
lution, cm taining guanine hydrochloride, xan- 
thine, hypoxanthine, thymine and uracil, was 
found, to be toxic at 6.0 mg/100 ml, but to 
be slightly beneficial at 0.6 and 0.06 mg/100 
ml. Adenine sulfate at the 1.0 mg/100 rnl 
level, however, resulted in some improvement 
when added to a mixture in which the purines 
and pyrimidines had already been incorpor- 
ated. The pentose sugars, ribose and clesxy- 
ribose, did not appear to influence the survival 
time of the cultures, but were added to the 
medium in order to complete the list of nu- 
cleic acid components. 
Accessory Growth Factors. In addition to 
the several groups of mmpunds already men- 
tioned, a number of accessory growth factors 
were also tested for possible stimulating ef- 
fects upon the cultures; and these were in- 
corporated in the synthetic mixture. Even 
though some of them showed no apparent 
beneficial effect when tested singly, there was 
a progressive improvement that could be at- 
tri'buted to various combinations of these 
metabolites. 
Cholesterol was dissolved in Tween 80, as 
described previously, and was added to the 
basal mixture at concentrations from 2.0 to 
0.02 m@OO ml. No efflect upon the culitures 
was noted. 
Sodium acetate was tested at concentra- 
tions ranging from 5.0 to 0.0005%. Levels of 
5 .O and 0.5 yo were found to be toxic, while 
lower concentrations had no appreciable effect. 
An adenosinebriphosphate ( ATP) solution 
was prepared, as already described, and this 
compund was tested on the cultures at levels 
of 100 to 0.01 pg per ml. No effect upon the 
cultures was noted at any concentration 
studied. 
Adenylic acid (from muscle) was used over 
the same range of concentrations employed 
with ATP, but it had no apparent effect upon 
the cultures. A number of experiments were 
carried out in whlich the concentrations of 
ATP and of adenylic acid were varied in re- 
spect to each other. Under these conditions, 
also, no appreciable effect upn the cultures 
was observed. 
Glutamine was incorporated in the synthetic 
mixtures at concentrations ranging from 100 
to 10 mg,/lOO ml, and appeared to be slightly 
benefidal at the highest level tested. Later 
experiments indicated that this concentration 
was not effective when added to synthetic mix- 
tures containing ATP and adenylic acid. In 
the presence Olf these metabolites, however, 
considerable improvement was exerted by a 
lower level of glutamine. This beneficial effect 
was greater than! that obtained previously by 
the highest level of glutamine in the absence 
of ATP and adenylic acid. Glutamine, ATP 
===== PAGE 6 =====
6 SYNTHETIC FEEDING MIXTURE FOR TISSUE CULTURES 
and adenylic acid were finally added to the 
synthetic mixture in the proportions that had 
given this marked improvement. 
Trace Metds. Although it is planned to 
study the possible effects of adding various 
truce metals to the synthetic mixture, iron is 
the only one that has so far been tested. Solu- 
tions of ferric nitrate and ferrous sulfate were 
tested over wide ranges of concentration. The 
results appeared to indicate that low concen- 
trations of both salts were slightly beneficial. 
Ferric nitrate was finally selected for use in 
the synthetic mixture (Table I) because it 
appeared to be the more stable of the two. 
Synthetic Mixture No. 199. Since these 
experiments had established the optimal con- 
centrations of the individual substances tested, 
it was now possi3ble to combine them as shown 
in Table 11. Embryo tissue cultivated in this 
mixture was found to put out extensive areas 
of new growth. This was in striking contrast 
to the results obtained with simpler mixtures. 
The majority of the cells that grew out from 
the original tissue fragments cultivated in 
Mixture 199 were large, flat and spindle- 
shaped. They did not develop excessive granu- 
lation for about 3 weeks, after which time 
many of the cultures underwent progressive 
degeneration. 
In repeatled experiments, Mixture 199 sup- 
ported cell life for an average period of 4 to 
5 weeks, and certain cultures survived for more 
than twice that time. Further studies are 
being undertaken in order to determine, if 
possible, the additional substances that may 
'be required to make Mixture 199 completely 
adequate for continuous cell multiplication. 
The effect of supplementing this medium with 
small amounts of serum and embryo extract is 
also under investigation. 
The studies reported in the 
present communication, which include the re- 
sults obtained with approximately 3000 cul- 
tures, have shown a progressive improvement 
in the survival of the tissues that have been 
cultivated. Although the medium that has 
been developed is not entirely adequate, it 
will support cell life for an average period of 
4 to 5 weeks and has made it possible to 
make a number of interesting observations on 
cell nutrition. 
Discussion. 
TABLE 11. 
Synthetic Mixture No. 199.* 
Mg per 
1000 ml 
1- Arginine 
Z-Histidine 
I-Lysino 
Z-Tyrosine 
dZ-Tryptophane 
dl-Phenylalanine 
2 -Cyst ine 
dl-Met hionine 
dZ-Serjne 
dZ-Threonine 
dl-Leucine 
dZ- Isoleucine 
dE-Valinc- 
dl-Glutamic acid 
dZ-Aspartic acid 
dZ- Alanine 
Z-Proline 
I-Hydroxypr oline 
Glycine 
Cysteine 
Adenine 
Guanine 
Xanthine 
Hypoxanthine 
Thymine 
ITracil 
Thiamin 
Riboflavin 
Pyridoxine 
Pyridoxal 
Xiacin 
Siacinamide 
Pantothenate 
Biotin 
Folic acid 
Choline 
Inositol 
p-Aminobenzoic acid 
Vitamin 
A 
Calciferol (Tit. D) 
Menadione (Vit. 9) 
a-Tocopherol phosphate 
Ascorbic acid 
Glutathione 
Tmem 80 (oleic acid) 
Choles ter ol 
Sodium acetate 
I -Glut amine 
Adenosinetriphosphate 
Adcnylic acid 
Iron 
(as ferric nitrate) 
Ribose 
D esoxyribose 
(Vit. E) 
70.0 
20.0 
70.0 
40.0 
20.0 
50.0 
20.0 
30.0 
50.0 
60.0 
120.0 
40.0 
50.0 
150.0 
60.0 
50.0 
40.0 
10.0 
50.0 
0.1 
10.0 
0.3 
0.3 
0.3 
0.3 
0.3 
0.010 
0.010 
0.025 
0.025 
0.025 
0.025 
0.01 
0.01 
0.01 
0.50 
0.05 
0.05 
0.10 
0.10 
0.01 
0.01 
0.05 
0.05 
20.0 
0.2 
50.0 
100.0 
10.0 
0.2 
0.1 
0.5 
0.5 
* This mixture also contained a modified Ty, 
rode 's soluti,on. 
The amino acid requirements of tissue cells 
have been investigated extensively by Fisch- 
er( 11) , who has shorn that cystine is most 
essential and that arginine, tryptophane, glu- 
11. Fischer, -A< Bioohem. J., 1948, v43, 491. 
===== PAGE 7 =====
SYNTHETIC FEEDING MIXTURE FOR TISSUE CULTURES 7 
tamic acid and lysine are also required. On 
the bask of Fischer’s work, the present finding 
that a mixture of 19 amino acids is greatly 
superior to an acid hydlmlyzate of casein might 
possibly be attributed to an increased level of 
cystine, since casein is knmn to be deficient 
in this particular amino acidl( 10). Moreover, 
Fischer’s results indicate that the concept of 
“essential” and “non-essential” amino acids 
does not apply to tissue cultures. Hence, the 
inclusion of all the naturally-occurring &o 
acids would seem to be a desirable feature of 
Mixture 199. It should also be pointed out 
that the medium. reported by White(5) con- 
him only the “essential” amino acids and does 
not includk cystine. 
The amino acid mixture finally employed in 
the present experiments contained 11 dl (the 
more easily avaihble) amino acids and, 7 Olf 
the natural I configuration. Colrapmtive tests 
were carried1 out with a similar mixture made 
up entirely of I amino acids.§ But since ex- 
periments made with the same range of con- 
centrations failed to show any significant dif- 
ferences in the remilts obtained with the two 
solutions, it was concluded that the d amino 
acids were not growth inhfbiting. 
The present studies did not afforcl any 
clear-cut evidence that vitamins are required 
by ells in tissue culture. It seemed advisable, 
however, to include a complete vikmin sup- 
plement in Mixture 199 in the hope that bene 
ficial effects might be evident when the mixture 
became more complete. It was felt that the 
preliminary media should include as many 
known nutritional (factors as possible, em 
though many of them had no apparent effect. 
If an adequate synthetic medium could be de- 
vised in this manner, the sunnecessary sub- 
stances auld eventually be eliminated. The 
results shown in Table I muld seem to justi- 
fy thlis method of approach. 
The addition of nucleic acid constituents, 
the purines, pyrimidhes and pentme sugars, 
to the basal solution was found to be beneficial. 
The incorporation of these cornpun& into 
Mixture 199 would seem ,to constitute an im- 
$ t-Threonine and Lvaline were obtained through 
the courtesy of Dr. Marvin Darrach, Merck and 
Co., Ltd., Montreal, Canada. 
provement over other synthetic mixtures that 
have been devised. White’s medium contained 
IU) nucEeic acid derivatives; and Fischer’s so- 
lution included only hypoxanthine and inosi- 
nic acid. The important role that has been as- 
signed to nucleic acids in cellular metabo- 
lism( 12,13) would suggest that any synthetic 
medium for animal tissue cells should contain 
either the nucleic acids themselves or sub- 
stances from which they may Ibe synthesized 
by the cells. 
It was hoped that the addition of varoious 
intermediary metabolites and accessory growth 
factors to the basal synthetic mixture ~ghd 
increase very greatly the survival tinme of the 
cultures through a stimulation of the cellular 
enzyme systems involved: in the sp&& of 
protoplasm. For this reason, great importance 
was attached to the incorporation of adam- 
sinetriphaphate, which is known to activate 
many metabolic processes( 14). The faot that 
this compound, and also adenylic acid, failed 
to exert significant eff&s upon the survival 
ti-me of the cultures was rather disappointing. 
It is possible, however, that stimulation by 
ATP may occur only in the presence of phos- 
phorylated intermediates of the glycolytic cy- 
cle. Thus, Fixher and his associates(4) 
found that whereas ATP did not stinmulate 
growth, fructose &phosphate was definitely 
:beneficial. A further study of this intemela- 
tionship is being conducted at the present 
time. 
The addition of glutamine to the basal mix- 
ture was observed to increase the life span of 
the cultures, but the improvement observed 
was not as great as that reponted by Fischer 
and his associates(4). It should be pointed 
out, however, that the present experiments 
were made with a basal mixture that contained 
a high level of glutamic acid, whereas Fisch- 
er’s results were obtained in the absence of 
glutamic add. 
When the present studies were undertaken, 
it was anticipated that certain interrelation- 
12. Davidson, J. N., Symposia SOC. Exp. Biol., 
13. Davidson, J. N., Cold Spring Harbor Sym- 
14. Potter, V. R., Advances in Enzymology, 1944, 
1947, v1, 77. 
posia &want. Biol., 1947, v12, 50. 
v4, 201. 
===== PAGE 8 =====
8 KIDNEY AND PROTEIN CATABOLISM 
ships and possible antagonisms might de- 
velop between various groups of growth fac- 
tors. The only instance of such effects en- 
countered up to the present time is that be- 
tween glutainiiie and -4TP plus adenylic acid. 
KO explanation of this interesting relationship 
is available at the present time. 
The necessity of cultivating the tissues in 
naturally-occurring nutritive media for 3 to 
5 days prior to the replacemlent of these 
natural media by synthetic mixtures is an un- 
desirable feature of the present experiments. 
During this preliminarq- period of cultivation, 
the cells might be able to store up reserve food 
substances that would serve as a source of 
nutrient during the subsequenlt period oif culti- 
vation in synthetic media. Still, tissues cul- 
tivated in Earle’s solution alone degenerated 
and died within 6 or 7 days (Table I). This 
yould seem to indicate that the effects of the 
initial period of maintenance in the prelim- 
inary feeding mixture are not exerted long 
after this original fluid is removed. Eventually 
it is hoped that this early maintenance period 
in non-synthetic media may be eliminated. 
The systematic addition of new ingredients 
to the synthetic mixture has seldom resulted 
in a marked improvement that could be at- 
tributed to any one substance. But periodic 
comparisons of the effect of the more recent 
test solutions with simpler 
b,een used earlier (Table 
111. Influence of 
mixtures that had 
I) have shown a 
progressive increase in the survival time of 
the cultures and a markled improvement in 
their appearance. Thus, for esample, results 
obtained, with Mixture 199 were vastly su- 
perior to those obtainled with mistures con- 
taining only amino acids, vitamins and Tween 
80. 
The results reported in the present com- 
munication have established that synthetic 
Mixture 199 will support the survival of chick 
embryo tissues for an average period of 4 to 5 
weeks. Although this mixture will not support 
the cells indefinitely, it does appear suitable 
for use as a basal synthetic medium for further 
investigations on cell nutrition. 
The nutrition of animal cells 
in tissue culture has been studried with partic- 
ular referenlcx to amino acids, vitamins, nucleic 
acid constituents and various accessory growth 
factors. Th,e optimal concentrations of these 
substances for the maintenance of cell life 
in vitro have been established and a complete- 
ly synthetic fleeding solution has been devised. 
Although this mixture will not support cell 
life indefinitely, it has been found adequate to 
maintain chick em,bryo cells for an average 
period of 4 to 5 weeks. The mixttire is being 
used as a basal synthetic medium for furthler 
studies on the unidentified growth-promoting 
substances known to occur in natural media. 
Summary. 
Received Octobcr 4,, 1949. F.S. l-:.I3.M., 3 950, vT3. 
Inhibition of Protein Catabolism.” Renal Tissue in 
( 17558) 
EDWARD C. PERSIKE (Introduced by -Arthur L. Bloomfield) 
From the Departiimzt oj Medicine, Stanjord rniversity School of Medicine, Saiz Fraizci,rcn, Cali!’. 
Data are presented elsewhere(1) which measured by the rate of urea formation, is 
show that the rate of protein catabolism, as increased markedly in rats after sudden loss 
of 75% or all of thle total renal tissue. -4 
higher rate of protein catabolism waJs found ’. This work was supported by a grant from the 
The author gratefully ackiiowledges technical in rats subjected to nephrectomy than in those with 25% oif the total renal 
substance remaining. It was suggested that 
loss of 75% or all of the total renal tissue 
might release the mechanism responsible for 
~___ ~~ 
Columbia Foundation. 
nssistaiice by JIiss H. J. L.reen, ~r. W. ~cw, 3Tr. 
I>. J. Poo, and Mr. Tt’. TVoiig. 
1. Persike, E. C., and Addis, T., Ani. J. Physiol., 
1949! ~158, 149. 