
===== PAGE 1 =====
- REVIEW ARTICLE -
Traditional and Modern Cell Culture in Virus
Diagnosis
Ali Hematian a, Nourkhoda Sadeghifard a, Reza Mohebi a,
Morovat Taherikalani b, Abbas Nasrolahi a, Mansour Amraei a,
Sobhan Ghafourian a,*
aClinical Microbiology Research Center, Ilam University of Medical Sciences, Ilam, Iran.
bRazi Herbal Medicines Research Center and Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, Lorestan
University of Medical Sciences, Khorramabad, Iran.
Received: November
17, 2015
Revised: November 29,
2015
Accepted: November
30, 2015
KEYWORDS:
cell culture,
gold standard,
traditional culture,
viruses
Abstract
Cell cultures are developed from tissue samples and then disaggregated by me-
chanical, chemical, and enzymatic methods to extract cells suitable for isolation
of viruses. With the recent advances in technology, cell culture is considered a gold
standard for virus isolation. This paper reviews the evolution of cell culture
methods and demonstrates why cell culture is a preferred method for identiﬁca-
tion of viruses. In addition, the advantages and disadvantages of both traditional
and modern cell culture methods for diagnosis of each type of virus are discussed.
Detection of viruses by the novel cell culture methods is considered more accurate
and sensitive. However, there is a need to include some more accurate methods
such as molecular methods in cell culture for precise identiﬁcation of viruses.
1. Introduction
In the 1900s, embryonated eggs and laboratory ani-
mals were used for isolation of viruses. Typically, cell
cultures are developed from tissue samples and then
disaggregated by mechanical, chemical, and enzymatic
methods to extract cells suitable for isolation of viruses.
With the utilization of cell culture technique, use of
laboratory animals in experiments has decreased
signiﬁcantly [1]. In addition, by selection of suitable cell
lines, the number of viruses indexed has increased
dramatically. Isolation of viral pathogens in cell cultures
commenced in the 1960s; however, at this point, some
limitations existed, including very limited services
available for diagnosis of viral infections. In 1970,
commercial development of puriﬁed reagents and cell
lines opened a new window for diagnosis of viral in-
fections [2]. With the discovery of cell culture, many
human viruses were grown in vitro . In comparison with
eggs and animals, cell culture is more convenient and
cost effective. This method is considered gold standard
for virus isolation and identiﬁcation [2].
The aims of the current review are to explain the
current role of cell culture in viral diagnosis and the
*Corresponding author.
E-mail: Sobhan.ghafurian@gmail.com (S. Ghafourian).
Osong Public Health Res Perspect 2016 7(2), 77 e82
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.phrp.2015.11.011
pISSN 2210-9099 eISSN 2233-6052
Copyright ª 2016 Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Published by Elsevier Korea LLC. This is an open access article
under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
===== PAGE 2 =====
advantages (e.g., cost, culture time) of the new
methods of culture over traditional cell culture
methods.
2. Traditional cell culture for virus
diagnosis
In 1913, for the ﬁrst time ever, a virus (vaccinia)
was grown in cell culture, and then in the 1930s,
yellow fever and small pox viruses were grown in cell
culture that aimed for vaccine production [3e5].
However, it was only in 1950 that the ﬁrst virus
(poliovirus) was isolated [6]. Cell culture was devel-
oped by adjustment of antibiotic for prevention of
contamination with bacteria and use of some chemical
to media, which provided the cell culture media [7].
Although culture media and cell lines can be pur-
chased commercially, some laboratories still prepare
culture media in-house. Cell culture can be accom-
plished in any container, however, the standard
container is a screw-cap tube glass (16 mm /C2125 mm;
Figure 1 ) in which monolayer cells can grow on one
side of the glass. For accurate identiﬁcation of viruses,
different types of cell lines should be prepared to
inoculate the suspected sample. The most important
cell lines widely used for viral diagnosis are primary
rhesus monkey kidney cells (RhMK), primary rabbit
kidney cells, MRC-5, human foreskin ﬁbroblasts,
HEp-2, and A549.
The type of specimens to be used are determined
based on the number and cell types needed for virus
diagnosis. The cost of cell culture ranges from US $1.5/
tube to US $6.50/tube. The success of virus isolation
depends on the best selection, collection, and trans-
portation of clinical samples.
Figure 1. Standard screw-cap tubes (16 mm /C2125 mm) used
for cell culture.
Table 1. CPE formation and conﬁrmation test in different viruses.
Viruses
CPE in
Final identiﬁcation of isolatesFibroblasts A549 cells RhMK cells
Adenovirus Some produce clusters Grape-like clusters
or “lacy” pattern; 5 e8d
Some produce clusters IF for group and neutralization for type
Cytomegalovirus Foci of contiguous
rounded cells; 10 e30 d
dd CPE
Herpes simplex
virus
Rounded large cells; 2 e6 d Rounded large cells; 1 e4 d Some produce CPE IF for group and neutralization for type
Inﬂuenza virus dd Undifferentiated CPE,
cellular granulation; 4 e8d
IF for group and neutralization for type
Rhinovirus Degeneration, rounding; 7 e10 d dd CPE
CPE Z cytopathic effect; IF Z immunoﬂuorescence; RhMK Z rhesus monkey kidney cells.
78 A. Hematian, et al
===== PAGE 3 =====
2.1. Sample collection
The specimen processing protocol varies between
laboratories, but the main steps followed are as
follows:
First, the medium containing the sample is vortexed
and the swap is discarded. The liquid medium is then
centrifuged. The supernatant obtained is used in cell
culture. In this method, fungi, cells, bacteria, and blood
remain at the bottom of tube (pellet form), whereas vi-
ruses remain dispersed in the liquid.
Then, 0.2 e0.3 mL of the liquid is added to the cell
culture medium for absorption of the virus (inoculation).
The cell culture tube containing the virus for absorption
is then incubated at 35
/C14C and 5% CO 2 for 90 minutes,
following which the inoculum is discarded and
substituted with fresh medium. The cell culture tube is
incubated until the virus begins to grow. This process
may take 1 day to several weeks depending on the type
of virus. The cell culture tube is examined everyday
using an inverted microscope [8,9].
The standard protocol applied for estimating the
proliferation of the virus on monolayer cells involves
examination of unstained cells on monolayer cells.
Changes in monolayer cells (e.g., swelling, shrinking,
syncytium formation) indicate the presence of viruses.
These changes in cell culture are deﬁned as the cyto-
pathic effect (CPE), which is due to the presence of the
virus [10].
In most cases, the CPE appears after 5 e10 days of
incubation; however, an exception is herpes simplex
virus (HSV) in which the CPE is observed after just 24
hours. In some viruses, including cytomegalovirus
(CMV), 10e30 days are needed after ﬁrst incubation for
CPE observation. According to the type of cell line used
for cell culture, type of specimen, the incubation period,
and form of the CPE, the type of virus can be predicted;
however, conﬁrmatory testing such as immunoﬂuores-
cence (IF) assay is needed for better diagnosis. This
assay is based on the reaction between the antibody and
viral antigen. Table 1 shows the CPE of some viruses in
different cell lines. Figure 2 shows the CPE formation
by different types of viruses.
However, it is not possible to detect all viruses by IF
staining. Numerous serotypes are observed in the
enterovirus family, and al l these are not identiﬁed by
IF staining. Furthermore, m onoclonal antibody used
for identiﬁcation of enterov irus lacks sensitivity and
there are reports indicating crossreaction between
monoclonal antibody and enteroviral serotypes
[11e13].
Using the traditional cell culture methods, a variety of
viruses can be detected in different cell lines. However,
the long time needed for incubation and observation of
the CPE are signiﬁcant disadvantages; additionally, the
high cost associated with the purchase and maintenance
of different monolayer cells is another limitation.
3. The new format of cell culture
The traditional screw-cap cell culture tube
(16 mm /C2125 mm) is now replaced by a 1-dram vial or
a shell vial, which is smaller ( Figure 3). Using this vial,
it is possible to grow monolayer cells at the bottom of
the vial. In addition, this method also allows for easy
centrifugation.
Another type of new container used in recent times is
the microwell plate, which is also called a “cluster
plate.” This is available as a 24- or 96-well plate,
however, 24 wells are more popular.
3.1. Cryopreserved cell culture
Some laboratories prepare their cell lines in-house,
whereas some buy the commercial cell lines. With the
introduction of cryopreservation, the maintenance of
prepared cells became easier. Using this technique, the
monolayer cells are grown in shell vials and then stored
at /C0196
/C14C. Prior to use, the shell vial is removed from
liquid nitrogen and samples are incubated in a 37 /C14C
water bath. Then, the cell culture is prepared according
to the standardized protocol, and then clinical samples
are applied on the cell culture. It was reported that
cryopreserved monolayer cells are sensitive to chla-
mydiae, CMV, HSV, and other pathogens in respiratory
tract [14]. The various steps in cryopreserved cell cul-
ture are as follows:
3.2. Virus isolation in cocultured cells
Using this method, different types of cells are grown
as a monolayer in a vial and various monoclonal anti-
bodies are applied on these cells for diagnosis of
different viruses. Using this technique, different viruses
can be detected in the same vial.
Cell culture methods for virus identiﬁcation 79
===== PAGE 4 =====
MRC-5 and A549 cell lines were used as monolayer
in a vial for diagnosis of CMV, HSV, and adenoviruses.
Cocktail antibody was used for staining. A secondary
antibody labeled with antispecies antibodies was then
added. The labeled dyes are ﬂuorescein isothiocyanate
(FITC), Cy3, and 7-amino-4-methylcoumarin-4-acetate.
The stained cells were examined with FITC and then
with UV ﬁlters. The sensitivity of current experiment
was shown to be 93.8% for adenovirus, 88.9% for CMV,
and 100% for HSV [15].
Figure 2. Cell and virus culture.(A) Untreated A549 cells, (B) HSV2 inoculated with A549, (C) adenovirus inoculated with
A549, (D) untreated MRC-5 ﬁbroblasts, (E) cytomegalovirus-inoculated MRC-5 ﬁbroblasts, (F) rhinovirus inoculated with MRC-5
ﬁbroblasts, (G) untreated RhMK, (H) enterovirus inoculated with RhMk, (I) inﬂuenza A inoculated with RhMk, (J) untreated HEp-
2, (K) respiratory syncytial virus inoculated with HEp-2, and (L) monkey virus inoculated with RhMk. HSV Z herpes simplex
virus; RhMK Z rhesus monkey kidney cells.
Figure 3. Shell vial that can be directly centrifuged.
80 A. Hematian, et al
===== PAGE 5 =====
R-Mix cell is another cell line used for isolating a
variety of viral respiratory pathogens. This cell line is a
combination of A549 and mink lung cells in a shell vial.
Three R-Mix cell lines are used for each sample. The
vials were then centrifuged and incubated at 35
/C14C/5%
CO2. After 24 hours, R-Mix was treated with different
types of ﬂuorescein-labeled monoclonal antibody
against adenoviruses; parainﬂuenza virus Types 1, 2,
and 3; inﬂuenza virus Type A; inﬂuenza virus Type B;
and respiratory syncytial virus. Figure 4 shows IF
diagnosis of viral respiratory pathogens inoculated with
R-Mix cells.
3.3. Virus identiﬁcation in transgenic cell lines
This is a rapid and accurate technique that uses
transgenic cell lines. Some genetic elements are
included in the cells, using which particular virus can be
detected. These elements can be derived from any or-
ganism. In a previous study, for detection of human
immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV), CD4-positive lymphoid
cell line transformed into a retroviral vector containing
long terminal repeat promoter in combination with
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase gene and HeLa was
used. Using this transgenic cell line, only HIV was
detected; however, a limitation is that it cannot differ-
entiate between HIV-1 and HIV-2 [16].
4. Conclusion
Since its discovery, many innovative methods for cell
culture have been proposed (e.g., use of shell vial,
cryopreservation). In addition, the time required for
identiﬁcation of viruses showed a signiﬁcant decrease:
from 5e10 days (traditional methods) to 24 hours (novel
methods). Using different cells in one vial, the number
of different cell lines used in laboratories for
identiﬁcation of viruses was decreased. Furthermore,
detection of viruses by the novel cell culture methods is
more accurate and sensitive. However, there is a need to
include some more accurate experiments such as mo-
lecular methods in cell culture for precise identiﬁcation
of viruses.
Conﬂicts of interest
The author declares no conﬂicts of interest.
References
1. Freshney RI. Culture of animal cells, a manual of basic technique.
4th ed. New York (NY): Wiley-Liss; 2000. p. 200 e4.
2. Hsiung GD. Diagnostic virology: from animals to automation.
Yale J Biol Med 1984;57(5):727 e33.
3. Stinehardt E, Israeli E, Lambert R. Studies on the cultivation of
the virus of vaccinia. J Infect Dis 1913;13(2):204 e300.
4. Lloyd W, Theiler M, Ricci NI. Modiﬁcation of the virulence of
yellow fever virus by cultivation in tissues in vitro . Trans R Soc
Trop Med Hyg 1936;29(5):481 e529.
5. Rivers TM, Ward SM. Jennerian prophylaxis by means of intradermal
injections of culture vaccine virus. J Exp Med 1935;62(4):549e60.
6. Enders JF, Weller TH, Robbins FC. Cultivation of the Lansing
strain of poliomyelitis virus in cultures of various human embry-
onic tissues. Science 1949;109(2822):85 e7.
7. Schmidt NJ. Tissue culture technics for diagnostic virology. In:
Lennette EH, Schmidt NJ, editors. Diagnostic procedures for viral
and rickettsial infections. 4th ed. New York (NY): American
Public Health Association; 1969. p. 81 e178 [chapter 2] .
8. Mavromoustakis CT, Witiak DT, Hughes HJ. Effect of high-speed
rolling on herpes simplex virus detection and replication. J Clin
Microbiol 1989;26(11):2328 e31.
9. Landry ML, Hsiung GD. Primary isolation of viruses. In:
Specter S, Hodinka RL, Young SA, editors. Clinical virology
manual. 3rd ed. Washington, DC: ASM Press; 2000. p. 27 e42
[chapter 1] .
10. Limaye AP, Corey L, Koelle DM, et al. Emergence of ganciclovir-
resistant cytomegalovirus disease among recipients of solid-organ
transplants. Lancet 2000;356(9230):645 e9.
Figure 4. Immunoﬂuorescence diagnosis of viral respiratory pathogens inoculated with R-Mix cells. (A) Untreated R-Mix, (B)
adenovirus, (C) inﬂuenza type A, (D) inﬂuenza type B, (E) parainﬂuenza virus type 1, (F) parainﬂuenza virus 2, (G) parainﬂuenza
virus 3, and (H) respiratory syncytial virus.
Cell culture methods for virus identiﬁcation 81
===== PAGE 6 =====
11. Klespies SL, Cebula DE, Kelley CL, et al. Detection of enteroviruses
from clinical specimens by spin ampliﬁcation shell vial culture and
monoclonal antibody assay. J Clin Microbiol 1996;34(6):1465e7.
12. Rigonan AS, Mann L, Chonmaitree T. Use of monoclonal anti-
bodies to identify serotypes of enterovirus isolates. J Clin
Microbiol 1998;36(7):1877 e81.
13. Van Doornum GJ, de Jong JC. Rapid shell vial culture technique
for detection of enteroviruses and adenoviruses in fecal specimens:
comparison with conventional virus isolation method. J Clin
Microbiol 1998;36(10):2865 e8.
14. Huang YT, Yan H, Sun Y, et al. Cryopreserved cell monolayers
for rapid detection of herpes simplex virus and inﬂuenza virus. J
Clin Microbiol 2002;40(11):4301 e3.
15. Brumback BG, Wade CD. Simultaneous culture for adenovirus,
cytomegalovirus, and herpes simplex virus in same shell vial
by using three-color ﬂuorescence. J Clin Microbiol 1994;32(9):
2289e90.
16. Olivo PD. Transgenic cell lines for detection of animal viruses.
Clin Microbiol Rev 1996;9(3):321 e34.
82 A. Hematian, et al