
===== PAGE 1 =====
124 VIRUS HEMAGGLUTININ 
jections of 200 y thyroxin.: Injections were 
continued for 28 days or until death, which- 
ever occurred sooner. All animals fed the 
synthetic ration (diet -4.) and receiving the 
thyroxin injections survived the experi- 
mental period of 28 days. ,411 animals fed 
activated pancreas (diet Cz) and administered 
thyroxin died (average survival time 11.6 
days). These findings indicate that the del- 
: Thyroxin (Spntlictic C‘rpst.), Roche-Org:iiion, 
he., Sutky? S. J. The niaterial was dissolwd in 
.1 S S:iOJI, :id,justed to a pIT of 8.0 and diluted to 
a voluiiic containing 200 y tliyoxin per re. 
IN TISSUE CULTURES 
eterious effects of pancreas feeding in the 
thyroid-fed rat were not due to increased 
digestion or absorption of thyroactive ma- 
terial. 
Immature female rats failed to 
survive when fed purified rations containing 
both pancreas and desiccated thyroid. Length 
of survival was significantly prolonged if 
either pancreas or thyroid were eliminated 
from the experimental ration. The deleteri- 
ous effects of pancreas in the thyroid-fed rat 
were not due to increased digestion or absorp- 
tion of thyroactive material. 
Summnry. 
16638 
Production of Henlagglutinin by Mumps and Influenza A Viruses in 
Suspended Cell Tissue Cultures.” 
THOMAS H. WELLER AND JOHX F. ENDERS. 
From the Research Division of Infectious Disectscs of fhe Children’s Hospital, Children’s 
Medical Center, Boston, and the Departnicwts of Pediatrics, and Bucteriology and Immunology, 
Harvctrd Medical Scli 001. 
The property of agglutinating red blood 
cells characteristic of certain viruses such as 
mumps and influenza has provided a simple 
method of estimating their concentration in 
infected materials. The procedure however, 
insofar as we are aware, has not been ap- 
plied to viruses propagated in tissue cultures. 
Accordingly, experiments were undertaken 
with the purpose of ascertaining (a) whether 
the mumps virus would proliferate in sus- 
pended cell tissue cultures of the Maitland 
type and (b) whether this virus and influ- 
enza A virus would in such media produce 
detectable levels of hemagglutinin. 
Methods. Preparation and maintenance of 
cultures. Cultures were prepared in a man- 
ner similar to that described by the Mait- 
1ands.l The nutrient medium consisted 
routinely of 3 parts of a balanced salt solu- 
tion made up according to the formula of - 
*Aided in part by a grant from the Xational 
1 Maitland, H. B., and Maitland, M. C., Lancet, 
Foundation for Infantile Paralysis, Inc. 
1928, 2, 596. 
Hanks? and 1 part of Simm’s ox-blood serum 
ultrafiltrate.3 This mixture will hereafter be 
referred to as “HS.” In the experiments with 
mumps virus, the tissue employed consisted 
of amniotic membrane from 8- or 9-day-old 
chick embryos. The membranes were sus- 
pended in a small amount of “HS”, minced 
with scissors to obtain fragments approxi- 
mately 1 mm in diameter, and centrifuged 
for 2 minutes at 800 r.p.m. in a graduated 
centrifuge tube. The fragments were then 
resuspended in a total volume of “HS” six 
times that of the sedimented tissue. Using 
a large bore Pasteur pipette, 3 drops of this 
t The balanced salt solution as recommended by 
Dr. J. H. Hanks, contained the following in- 
gredients expressed as g/l: NaCl, 8.0; KC1, 0.4; 
MgS04 7 H20, 0.1; MgCl2 6 H20, 0.1; CaCl,, 
0.14; Na2HP04, 0.06; KH2P04, 0.06; glucose, 
1.0. To each liter, 5 cc 0.4% phenol red waa 
added. After autoclaving at 10 lb. for 10 minutes, 
0.5 cc 1.470 isotonic NaHC03 was added per 20 cc 
of the above. 
t Purchased from Microbiological Associates 
Laboratories, Flemington, N. J. 
 at EMORY UNIV on August 25, 2015ebm.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
===== PAGE 2 =====
VIRUS HEMAGGLUTININ IN TISSUE CULTURES 125 
tissue suspension were transferred to 25 cc 
Erlenmeyer flasks containing 3 cc of “HS” 
and fitted with rubber stoppers. In the ex- 
periments with influenza virus, the cultures 
were similarly prepared employing amniotic 
membrane, allan toic membrane, or embryonic 
brain tissue obtained from 8-day-old eggs. 
All cultures were incubated at 35°C. 
Their subsequent handling differed from 
that usually employed with suspended cell 
cultures in that the nutrient fluid was re- 
placed at intervals as indicated below. This 
was accomplished by tilting the flasks, allow- 
ing the tissue to settle, and removing as com- 
pletely as possible the supernatant fluid from 
each flask with a fine bore Pasteur pipette; 3 
cc of fresh “HS” were then added. In cer- 
tain of the experiments subcultures were car- 
ried out by transferring aliquots of the pooled 
supernatant fluids thus removed to flasks 
containing freshly prepared tissue fragments. 
Determination of hemagglutinin and egg 
infectivity titers. Using a modified Salk 
technic’ the hemagglutinin titers were deter- 
mined of the stock viruses and of the indi- 
vidual supernatant fluids removed periodically 
from the tissue cultures. The tests on the 
supernatant fluids were performed as soon 
as they were removed, using two-fold dilu- 
tions and beginning with a final dilution of 
1 : 2. Pooled erythrocytes obtained from the 
same 4 hens were employed throughout. The 
highest final dilution of the supernatant fluid 
giving complete agglutination was taken as 
the endpoint. The results were expressed as a 
geometric mean of the individual hemagglu- 
tinin titers of the supernatant fluids from each 
set of cultures. 
In the experiments on the growth of mumps 
virus in tissue cultures, the infectivity for 
chick embryos of the original inoculum and 
certain of the supernatant fluids removed at 
various times was determined. Aliquots of the 
supernatant fluids were pooled and centri- 
fuged for 15 minutes at 1000 r.p.m. and the 
sediment discarded. Serial ten-fold dilutions 
~~ 
2 Enders, J. F., and Levens, J. H., In: Diagnos- 
tic Procedures for Virus and Rickettsia1 Diseases. 
American Public Health Association, New Y ork, 
1948, pp. 139-164. 
20- ORIGINAL CULTURES. 
INOC 02CC 
MUMPS VIRUS 
(I D,o:10-08) 
EGG INF 10 ’4 lo-*’ > 10-20 
YA 
20 4 SECOND SUBCULTURES 
0.ICC 10.’ 
FIRST SUBCULT. 
I 
EGG INF 10-5 2 
111 I I I I II 
o 4 e 12 16 20 24 ze 32 
FIG. 1. 
DAYS INCUBATION OF ORIGINAL CULTURES 
Mean hemagglutinin and infectivity titers of 
tissue cultures inoculated with mumps virus. 
The liemagglutinin titer (HA) is expressed as 
the reciprocal of the geometric mean of the indi- 
vidual titers of the supernatant fluids from 4 cul- 
tures. The infectivity titers are expressed as the 
dilution of the pooled supernatant fluids from 4 
flasks representing the IDso dose for embryonated 
hen’s eggs calculated according to the method of 
Reed and Muench.3 
were then prepared in isotonic phosphate buf- 
fer (pH 7.1) and 7-day-old eggs in groups of 
5 or 6 were inoculated, intraamniotically with 
0.1 cc of each dilution. Six or 7 days later, 
the amniotic fluids were harvested and tested 
individually in a final dilution of 1:8 for the 
presence of hemagglutinins. The presence of 
complete hemagglutination in this dilution 
was taken as evidence of infection. From 
the data so obtained the 50% infectivity end 
point was calculated by the method of Reed 
and M~ench.~ No assay of the infectivity of 
the cultures inoculated with influenza virus 
was made. 
( 1 ) . Cultivation of mumps Experimental. 
3Reed, L. J., and Muench, H., Am. J. Hyg., 
1938, 27, 493. 
 at EMORY UNIV on August 25, 2015ebm.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
===== PAGE 3 =====
126 VIRUS HEMAGGLUTINN IN TISSUE CULTURES 
virus. A typical experiment which is sum- 
marized in Fig. 1 will be described. The 
mumps virus employed as the initial inoculum 
consisted of pooled amniotic fluid derived from 
the 42nd egs passage of a strain originally 
isolated and maintained in this laboratory 
(Enders strain). This material had a hemag- 
glutinin titer of 512 and an IDr,” of lo-’;.‘ 
in eggs. Sis tissue cultures were prepared 
with minced amniotic membrane. Four Aasks 
were each immediately inoculated with 0.2 cc 
of a 10 dilution in isotonic phosphate buffer 
of the virus. The two uninoculated cultures 
were kept as controls. At +day intervals the 
supernatant fluids were removed and 3 cc of 
fresh “HS” were then added. In this way 
the original cultures were maintained over a 
32-day period. The hemagglutinin titers of 
all the individual supernatant fluids were de- 
termined and the egg infectivity titers of the 
pooled supernatant fluids removed on the 
12th, 20th and 32nd day after inoculation 
were established. 
During this period of 32 days two subcul- 
tures were carried out. After the original 
cultures had been incubated 12 days, with 
two changes of “HS” in the interim, equal 
volumes of the supernatant fluids removed on 
the 12th day were pooled, centrifuged for 15 
minutes at 1000 r.p.ni. and the sediment dis- 
carded; 0.1 cc of the undiluted pooled super- 
natant fluid was then added to each of 4 
newly prepared flasks containing minced amni- 
otic membrane and “HS”. The supernatant 
fluids from the control flasks were handled 
in an identical manner and 2 new control 
cultures set up. Flasks of the first subculture 
group were maintained 20 days with changes 
of the supernatant fluids at 4-day intervals. 
The second subcultures were inoculated 
with material removed from the first sub- 
cultures on the eighth day of incubation. The 
supernatant fluids from the latter were pooled 
and centrifuged, diluted 10 in isotonic phos- 
phate buffer and added in a volume of 0.1 cc 
to each flask containing newly prepared 
tissue. The second subculture flasks were 
incubated for 12 days, with change of the 
supernatant fluids every 4 days. 
(2) Cultivation of Influenza A virus. Cul- 
tures prepared with minced amniotic mem- 
brane, chorioallantoic membrane or brain were 
inoculated with 0.1 cc of infected allantoic 
fluid containing the PR8 strain of Influenza 
A virus diluted in isotonic phosphate 
buffer. In one experiment, flasks of each 
type of tissue were inoculated immediately 
after they were prepared, while to others the 
virus was added only after an interval of 6 
days. In another experiment the virus was 
introduced 4 days after the cultures had been 
prepared and the supernatant fluid changed 
once. At various intervals, usually each day, 
0.5 cc of the supernatant fluid was removed 
and replaced with the same volume of fresh 
“HS.” The concentration of hemagglutinin 
in each specimen of fluid was determined. 
Results. 1. Mumps virus. The results 
of the hemagglutinin and infectivity titrations 
carried out on the supernatant fluids removed 
from the tissue cultures are summarized in 
Fig. 1. 
From these data it is evident that the 
mumps virus rapidly increases in cultures of 
this type. Th.e original cultures were 
inoculated with 0.2 cc of diluted stock virus 
having a calculated ID3,, titer for egg embryos 
of thirty-two days later the IDs0 titer 
of the pooled supernatant from the second 
subculture was Not taking into ac- 
count the quantity of virus discarded in the 
supernatants and assuming that each routine 
addition of nutrient fluid resulted in a 1:15 
dilution of the virus, it may be calculated from 
the data included in Fig. 1 that an increase 
of the order of 1.3 X 1017 occurred in the 
egg infectivity titer. Likewise, during the 
experimental period an increase in the hemag- 
glutinin titer of the order of 3.3 X lo1* 
occur red. 
Active tissue growth of apparently the same 
degree was observed in all flasks irrespective 
of whether or not the virus had been inocu- 
lated. -About the 6th to 8th day of cultiva- 
tion free-floating, thin-walled cyst-like struc- 
tures became numerous in the cultures of 
amniotic membrane. The cyst-like forms 
were no longer apparent after the 20th day. 
Between the 12th and 16th day, fixation of 
some of the tissue fragments to the bottom of 
 at EMORY UNIV on August 25, 2015ebm.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
===== PAGE 4 =====
VIRUS HEMAGGLUTININ IN TISSUE CULTURES 127 
the flask was noted. These could be seen 
under low magnification to be surrounded by 
a zone of proliferating cells. In the cultures 
maintained 32 days there was an apparent 
decrease in the rate of growth after the 28th 
day; at this time many of the fragments 
previously adherent to the glass became loose 
and floated in the fluid. 
Morphologic evidence of growth was ac- 
companied by a fall in pH. Thus, during 
the 4-day interval between the changes of 
nutrient fluid, the pH, as estimated colori- 
metrically, fell from 7.6-7.7 to 6.9-7.1. 
This shift occurred throughout each 4-day 
period until the 28th day of cultivation in the 
original series. Thereafter, coincident with 
the apparent decrease in the rate of growth, 
the pH did not go below 7.3-7.5. 
2. Influenza virus. The results with 3 
different series of cultures have shown that 
the PR8 strain of Influenza A virus multiplies 
rapidly in the type of tissue culture employed 
as indicated by the early appearance and 
subsequent increase of hemagglutinin in the 
supernatant fluid. Thus in one experiment in 
which freshly prepared cultures of allantoic 
membrane, amniotic membrane and brain were 
employed, the geometric mean hemagglutinin 
titers after 72 hours of 2 cultures of each kind 
of tissue were 91, 6, and 32 respectively. Since 
the hemagglutinin titer of the virus inoculum 
was 512 and the dilution factor 3000, it can 
be calculated that the concentration of hem- 
agglutinin during the period of cultivation had 
increased 535 times in the cultures of allan- 
toic membrane, and 188 X and 35 X re- 
spectively in those of brain and amniotic 
membrane. The comparatively low titer ob- 
tained with the cultures of amniotic mem- 
brane should not be regarded as evidence 
for the failure of the virus to multiply as 
actively in this tissue, since in other experi- 
ments the amount of hemagglutinin produced 
the multiplication of the virus almost as well 
as the allantoic membrane. Whereas neuro- 
tropic strains of influenza virus have been 
developed by Stuart-Harris and  other^^-^ it 
is generally held that the PR8 strain has no 
affinity for nervous tissue. 
Similar results were obtained in respect to 
the increase in hemagglutinin in tissue cul- 
tures which had \been maintained for 4 or 
6 days before the virus was inoculated. On 
the whole, however, the titers were somewhat 
lower. For example, 72 hours after inocula- 
tion of the virus, the geometric mean titers 
of two cultures of each of the 3 kinds of tissue 
were 8, 11, and 6 for allantoic membrane, 
amniotic membrane and brain respectively. 
These cultures had been prepared 6 days 
before the virus was added. Similarly in cul- 
tures of allantoic membrane prepared 4 days 
before inoculation the mean hemagglutinin 
titer did not exceed 16 after 72 hours. 
Determinations of hemagglutinin titers at 
12, 16, 20, 24, 48 and 72 hours and at certain 
intervals thereafter showed that the maxi- 
mum production was attained between the 
2nd and 3rd day. The hemagglutinin was 
present, however, in low concentration as 
early as 16 hours. By removing on the 4th 
day following inoculation all the supernatant 
fluid and replenishing with fresh material, it 
was found that thereafter a slow increase in 
hemagglutinin may gradually occur. But the 
titer attained did not exceed 2 even after 
an interval of 10 days and this was observed 
only in a series of cultures that were inocu- 
lated with the virus immediately after their 
preparation. 
It has been demonstrated that 
an egg-adapted strain of mumps virus multi- 
plies actively in tissue cultures consisting of 
fragments of amniotic membrane of the chick 
embryo suspended in a mixture of ox serum 
ultrafiltrate and balanced salt solution. In 
Discussion. 
was to that encountered in cul- -t-Harris, C. H., Lancet, 1939, 1, 497. tures of allantoic membrane and' brain. In 
this instance the fact that relatively small 
amounts of amniotic tissue were employed 
probably was responsible for the low yield of 
hemagglutinin. It is of interest to observe 
that the embryonic #brain tissue supported 57, 125. 
5Francis, T., Jr., and Moore, A. E., J. Expa 
fi~enie, G., and Henle, IT., Science, 1944, 100, 
?Vilches, A., and Hirst, G. K., J. Intmun., 1947, 
Me&., 1940, 72, 717. 
410. 
 at EMORY UNIV on August 25, 2015ebm.sagepub.comDownloaded from 
===== PAGE 5 =====
128 3IAGNESIUM DEFICIENCY IN RATS 
thi.; medium its multiplication is sufficient to 
produce ineasura ble quantities of hemagplu- 
tinin in the supernatant fluid even when small 
inocula are employed. It is therefore pos- 
sible within certain limits to estimate with 
ease the capacity of the virus to multiply 
under these conditiom. It has also been 
determined that Influenza -4 virus (PR8 
strain) increases in this type of medium to a 
level at which its hemagglutinating property 
can also be readily assayed. 
The develcpment of measurable amounts 
of hemacglutinin in tissue cultures is of sig- 
nificance. since it provides a swift and con- 
vsnient  mean^ of following the rate and de- 
gree of multiplication of the mumps and in- 
Buenz:t viru3es in ii >ysteni which, compared 
with a medium such as the chick embryo or 
the mou.qe. is jar less comples. The technic, 
therefore. might be applied profitably to the 
study oi many problems. for example: the 
effect of various chemical compounds in ac- 
celerating or inhibiting the growth of these 
viruses. 
It is noteworthy that the rate of multi- 
plication of influenza -4 virus was found to 
lie much more rapid than that of mumps. 
This difference has been previously observed 
in experiments with infected chick embryos 
and would seem, as Ginsberg, Goebel and 
HorsfalF have indicated, to reflect a basic 
difference in the biologic properties of the two 
agents. 
Coizclzrsions. 1. An egg-adapted strain of 
mumps virus has been cultivated in suspended 
cell tissue cultures. 2. In such media the 
mumps virus as well as Influenza A virus 
( PRS strain) produce measurable quantities 
of hemagglutinin. 
h C;ins;Lerg. IT. S., Goebel, JV. I?., nld Horsfall, 
1'. Id., J. 6.~11. Xed., 1948, 87: 383. 
16639 
Magnesium Deficiency in the Sexually Mature Rat." 
G. P. BARROX, P. B. PEARSOX, AKD S. 0. BROWN. 
From the Dcparttilciit of Biocheniistry and Stlfrition (ind Ilic Dcpcirtmciit of Biology, Agricul- 
tural apid JLechanictil Collcge of Texccs, Collc!jc Sfnt ion. 
That the young rat requires an adequate 
dietary intake of magnesium for normal life 
processes was first established by Kruse, 
Orent, and l\IcCollum.l .is shown by Tufts 
and Greenberg, two phases seem to be ob- 
served in magnesium deficiency in young 
rats.? The first is marked by vasodilatation, 
hyperemia, and hyperexcitability. The sec- 
ond phase is characterized by nutritive failure, 
cachexia, and kidney damage. There have 
been controversial reports as to the patho- 
logical involvement of the skin in magnesium 
deficiency in rats. Kruse and his co-workers 
reported definite trophic changes in the skin 
and nails of young animals on a diet deficient 
in magnesium. Likewise, other workers re- 
ported skin lesions in animals deprived of 
magnesium."i4 On the contrary, Tufts and 
Greenberg and others did not observe dis- 
turbances in the skin of young animals raised 
on diets deficient in magnesium.5f' Greenberg 
suggested that the trophic conditions observed 
by several workers were due to the experi- 
mental animals not receiving various con- 
stituents of the vitamin B complex in sufficient 
quantities 7 
* Aided by a gr:iiit from the Dow Chemical 
Coiiipii~', Freelmrt, TCS~Y, through the Texas 
A SC IT 12ese:irch Foundation. 
1 Kruse, 11. I]., Orent, E. R., and McCollum, 
E. IT., J. Bid. Chein., 1932, 06, 519. 
2 Tufts, E, IT., and Greenberg, D. M., J. BWZ. 
3 Watcliorii, E., and XcCance, R. A., Biochem., 
4 Shrader, G. A, Prickctt, C. O., and Salmon, 
5 Brookfield, R. W., Brit. Med. J., 1934, 1, 848. 
Cllcm., 1938, 122, 693. 
J., 1937, 81, 1379. 
W. D., J. Nutrition, 1937, 14, 85. 
 at EMORY UNIV on August 25, 2015ebm.sagepub.comDownloaded from 