
===== PAGE 1 =====
208 
Poliomyelitis Viruses in Tissue Culture. IV. Protein-Free Nutrient Media 
in Stationary and Roller Tube Cultures.* (19823) 
JOSEPH L. MELNICK AND JOHN T. RIORDAN. 
From the Section of Preventive Medicine, Yale Gniversity School of Medicine, Xew Haven. 
The multiplication of poliomyelitis virus in 
roller tube cultures of human and monkey tis- 
sues is usually accompanied by degenerative 
changes in the developing outgrowth (cyto- 
pathogenic effect) (1-6). For such cultures, 
tissue fragments are imbedded in a plasma 
clot attached to the inner wall of a test tube 
and after incubation in the presence of a 
suitable medium in a rolled drum at 35°C for 
several days, cellular proliferation is usually 
quite marked. If poliomyelitis virus is added 
to the cultures at this time, subsequent cyto- 
pathic changes in the outgrowth serve as an 
in &ro indicator of virus proliferation. 
The present report is concerned with the 
simplification of the medium in which cells 
grow out from the tissue fragments and in 
which virus may be grown in tube cultures. 
Also, in confirmation of Li and Schaeffer ( 7). 
and Scherer and Syverton (6), satisfactory 
results may be obtained with tubes which are 
not rolled. The nutrient media in current use 
for work with poliomyelitis virus tube cul- 
tures contain seruni or embryonic extracts in 
addition to serum ultrafiltrate and isotonic 
salt solution( 1-6). In the present study. 
protein-containing, cellular growth stimulants 
(serum or embryonic extract) have been suc- 
cessfully replaced by a protein hydrolysate 
(1actalbumin)t and the roller drums have 
been replaced by racks for holding the tubes 
on their sides with the fragments submerged 
in the nutrient medium. 
Materials and Methods. The technic of 
preparing roller tube cultures of monkey testi- 
cular tissue as used in this laboratory has 
been described in detail, together with the 
behavior of selected strains of poliomyelitis 
virus in tissue culture( 33). These conditions 
have been followed in the present experiments 
*Aided by a grant from the National Foundation 
for Infantile Paralysis. 
t Protein digests had already been used to stim- 
ulate cell proliferation in tissue culture in 1928(9). 
-_ 
except that the acetone-extracted chick em- 
bryo (.4CE) in the medium has been replaced 
by a lactalbumin enzymatic hydrolysate.; The 
powdered hydrolysate (5 g) was mixed with 
Hank's salt solution without sodium bicar- 
bonate (95 ml) and dissolved by autoclaving 
at 10 lb pressure for 10 minutes. The solu- 
tion is stable when kept frozen. and pre- 
sumably at 4" also. If a slight precipitation 
occurs upon thawing, it can be brought into 
solution by heating in lukewarm water. The 
pH of the solution is 6.8 and it is brought to 
7.5 with sterile 0.1 S SaOH before using. 
The complete medium which is added to the 
imbedded tissue fragments during outgrowth 
of cells consists of Hanks-Simnis solution (3 
parts of Hanks' balanced salt solution plus 1 
part of Simms' ultrafiltrate) 9 parts, and 5% 
lactalbumin hydrolysate, 1 part. After the 
addition of virus, a 170 lactalbumin hydroly- 
sate solution is used, as this concentration is 
sufficient to maintain the cells during the sub- 
sequent observation period. In each of the ex- 
periments to .be described half of the tubes 
were rolled in a drum(5) and half were held 
stationary on their side in a rack or in a card- 
board carton which was slightly inclined, so 
that 1 ml of nutrient fluid would form a shal- 
low layer and reach not over 2/3 of the 
distance from the bottom to the opening of 
the 6 x 150 mm test tube. The 6 to 10 tissue 
fragments were placed in a line on one side 
of the test tube as recommended by Youngner, 
V'ard, and Salk( 4). This was particularly 
useful in the present experiments to insure 
that all fragments were submerged in the 
fluid medium. ,411 tubes were held at 35". 
They were removed every few days for micro- 
scopic examination of the cultures and for 
changing nutrient fluids. 
The hydrolysate was obtained from NutritionaI 
Biochemical Corp., Cleveland, Ohio. A typical 
analysis, according to the producer, yielded total 
nitrogen 12%, amino nitrogen i.3%, ash 3.6%, 
sodium chloride 0.9%, and moisture 6.87%. 
===== PAGE 2 =====
POLIOMYELITIS VIRUS IN TISSUE CULTURE 209 
T-4BLE I. Effect of Lactalbumin Hydrolysate on Growth of Fibroblasts and Their Destruction 
Extent of degeneration on 10th day* 
by Poliomyelitis Virus. 
Growth of fibroblasts 
4th day 6th day 10" virus lo4 virus lo4 virus 
- 
9, - L.\CT.,t 0.5% final conc. Luxuriant Luxuriant 3+ 1+ 
0.1 7c Good 3+ 1+ 
Beginning Good 2+ 1+ 
2+ 1+ 
0.01% - ,, ,, - Chick embryo extr. 
* 10th day of exp., or 4 days after addition of virus. Extent of fibroblast degeneration is given 
lo-* virus indicates tissue culture Y-SK virus, 
t LACT. = Lactalbumin hydrolysate. 
in arbitrary units which have been defined(5). 
diluted 1 to 100, added to the tubes on the 6th day; lo4 virus, diluted to 1 to IOOO; etc. 
Results. \\'hen lactalibumin hydmlysate is 
used in place of ACE, fibroblasts from monkey 
testicular tissue grow out more rapidly. By 
the 4th day after the fragments are implanted 
in the tubes. the outgrowth is sufficiently lux- 
uriant so that the tubes may be inoculated 
with vinus. As shown from Table I, this is 
about 2 to 3 days earlier than seen with ACE. 
Such tubes respond to tissue culture adapted 
virus in similar fashion to ACE-containing 
tubes, and titration results similar to those 
shown in Table I have been obtained with 
stationary as well as rolled tubes. Photomicro- 
graphs in Fig. 1 and 2 illustrate the clear 
na.ture of the normal fibroblasts and also the 
extensive degeneration produced by the action 
of the virus. in both rolled and stationary 
tubes. For purposes of comparison, tubes 
containing ACE were set up at the same time 
and typiual fragments are also shown. 
-4 number of such experiments have been 
carried out in which virus has been added 
4 days after the tissue fragments have been 
implanted in the tube. With slower growing 
iragments (ACE medium), it has been cus- 
tomary to change fluid on the 3rd or 4th day 
after implantation and add virus on the 6th 
or 7th day. Because cells grow out faster 
with hydrolysate in athe medium, virus may 
be added at the time of the first fluid change. 
This is particularly convenient in carrying out 
neutralization #tests for poliomyelitis anti- 
bodies in tissue cultiures, for the tubes need be 
handled only on the 4th day when fluid is 
changed and the virum-serum mixture is 
added, and on the 8th day when the ,tubes are 
read (5). 
Virus growth was supported as well, and 
apparently for longer periods, in the hydroly- 
sate tubes than in the ACE tubes. A typical 
experiment showing the titrations of fluids har- 
vested at various intervals from ACE and 
lactalbumin hydrolysate cultures, both rolled 
and stationary, is shown in Table 11. Al- 
though virus could still Ibe detected in all 
'tubes 30 days after their inoculation, virus 
production fell off markedly in the ACE after 
the 18th day and in the hydrolysate tubes 
after the 23frd day or perhaps even later. The 
degeneration observed in the hydrolymte 
tubes was specific, for not only was it pre- 
vented by homotypic antiserum, but also fluid 
from tubes showing degeneration produced a 
similar effect when tiltrated in ACE tuks. 
The degeneration produced in titrating the 
hydrolysate tubes was also poven to be 
specific. In tubes which yielded an endpoint 
at the 1F concentration, fluid was harvsted 
from the last tubes in the series showing de- 
generation (1W) and from the tubes at the 
next dilution also ( lP3). These fluids were 
transferred to a new series of ACE roller tubes, 
half of which had each received 0.1 ml of 1: 10 
hnhilde antiserum. The results, listed be- 
low, indicate that Brunhilde virus was pres- 
ent in the tulbes at the titration endpoint (read 
by cytopathic changes), lbut not in the next 
tubes in [the series which failed to show de- 
generative changes: 
Results of tests in 
ACE roller tubes, 
degeneration 
~~ 
Harvest from lo-' tubes 4+ 
lo-* tubes 4- BA* 0 
lo-' tubes 0 
lO-'tubes -I- BA 0 
*BA = Brunhilde antiserum. 
After the 16th day or 90, the fibroblasts in 
the hydrolysate oontrol tubes tend to shrink 
or wander in :ward the tissue fragment and 
===== PAGE 3 =====
210 POLIOMYELITIS VIRUS IN TISSUE CULTURE 
FIG. 1. Comparison of rolled and stationary cultures of monkey testicular tissue grown in lacld- 
bumin hydrolysate medium. (A) Gninoculated, rolled control tubes showing clear, fibroblastic out- 
growth on the 8th day after implantation of tissue fragments. (B) Roller tube culture inoculated 
on the 4th day with 100 tissue culture doses of Brunhilde (Type 1) virus. .4s shown, 4 days later, 
extensive degeneration is evident. (C) C'ninoculated stationary control tube, similar to A. (D) 
Virus treated stationary culture, similar to B. 

===== PAGE 4 =====
POLIOMYELITIS VIRUS IN TISSUE CULTURE 
FIG. 2. Comparison of rolled and stationary cultures of monkey testicular tissue grown in acetone- 
ertracted chick embryo medium. (E) Uninoculated, rolled control tubes showing clear, fibroblastic 
outgrowth on the 8th day after implantation of tissue fragments. (F) Roller tube culture inocu- 
lated on the 4th day with 100 tissue culture doses of Brunhilde (Type 1) virus. As shown, 4 days 
later, extensive degeneration is evident. (G) Uninoculated stationary control tube, similar to E. 
(H) Virus treated stationary culture, similar to F. 
211 

===== PAGE 5 =====
212 POLIOMYELITIS VIRUS IN TISSUE CULTURE 
T-ABLE 11. Titrations of Harvests from Stationary 
and Rolled Tubes Containing Acetone-Extracted 
Chick Embryo (ACE) or Lactalbumin Hydrolysate 
(LACT.) * 
Type tube culture in which virus was grownt 
Day oi ACE ACE LACT. L.-\CT. 
har\.est rolled stationary rolled stationary 
4 1 o-~ lo-' 10-~ 
9 lo4 10-~ lo4 
13 10-l lo-* 
1s lo-? lo-' lo-? 
2.3 lo-' lo-' 1 o-3 10-3 
20 loo loo lo-' 
t: -411 titrations were carried out in rolled tubes 
containing ACE, using 0.1 ml per tube as in inoculum, 
and serial 10-fold dilutions. Results are given as the 
least concentration oi fluid producing a cytopatho- 
genic efiect in at least one of two tubes during an 
observation period of 8 days. For further details 
see Ledinko. Riordan, and Melnick( 5). 
+ Three tubes of each type indicated were inocu- 
lated with 100 tissue culture doses of Brunhilde 
rT\.pe 1) virus, 8th tissue culture passage. Fluids 
irom each set of three tubes were pooled when 
harvested. 
- 
parallel the periphery of the fragment. Such 
fibroblasts are not suitable for microscopic 
examination, which must be discontinued. 
However: the control tissue continues to 
metabolize well for over 30 days, at this time 
still bringing the pH of the medium from 7.5 
to 7.0 in a few days. -is shown in Table 11. 
virus continues to multiply for sometime after 
the ribroblasts have degenerated. This is true 
ior stationary as well as rolled tubes. 
Several thousand tubes containing lactal- 
bumin hydrolysate in the medium have been 
used in this laboratory, in which fibroblastic 
outgrowth was obtained in stationary tubes. 
This study indicates that the 
presence of protein in the fluid phase of the 
nutrient medium is not essential for the 
growth of fibroblasts or for the multiplication 
of poliomyelitis viruses in tube cultures. 
Thicke et al. (8) have recently found that syn- 
thetic medium ';199"( 10) will support the 
propagation of poliomyelitis virus in flask cul- 
tures. and Salk et QZ. ( 1 l ) have also indicated 
that it is highly satisfactory in roller tube 
cultures. Future work will undoubtedly sim- 
plit'j- the medium so that it will contain only 
those compounds essential for outgrowth of 
cells and for virus multiplication. The use of 
coinniercially available and inexpensive lactal- 
bumin hydrolysate offers certain advantages 
Discussion. 
in this direction, particularly as a substitute 
for the amino acid block used in synthetic 
media( 10). 
The benefits of protein-free media are great 
in subsequent work with tissue culture grown 
virus. To mention only a few: (i) foreign 
proteins can be eliminated from vaccines pre- 
pared from such fluids (except for the small 
amounts coming from the plasma clot and 
the tissue fragments), and (ii) complement- 
fixing antigens and purified virus preparations 
should be more easily obtained from starting 
material in which extraneous protein is ab- 
sent or present in insignificant amounts. In 
their work on the preparation of complement- 
fixing antigens, Svedmyr, Enders, and Hol- 
loway ( 12 ) have recommended the replace- 
ment of the protein-containing medium by a 
dialyzable medium, but only after cellular 
outgrowth had occurred and after inoculation 
of the cultures with virus. 
Stationary tubes are particularly useful in 
allowing poliomyelitis virus isolations, typing, 
and neutralization tests ,to be carried out in 
laboratories in which roller drums are not 
available. If tubes wilth tissue fragments im- 
bedded in a plasma clot become available from 
a central supply agency, then any good hos- 
pital laboratory equipped with an incubator 
should be able to carry out diagnostic tests 
for poliomyelitis. 
Sttmrnary. Poliomyelitis virus may ,be 
propagated in test tube, plasma-clot cultures 
of monkey testicular tissue in the absence of 
protein in the fluid phase of the nutrient 
medium. The tubes may be held stationary 
with the fragments submerged under a thin 
layer of medium, or they may be tumd in a 
roller drum. The medium used contained 
lactalbumin enzymatic hydrolysate, serum 
ultrafiltrate, and balanced salt solution. With 
such 0 medium, fibroblasts grow out within 
4 days after the cultures are made, and are 
then suitable for use in virus titrations and 
neutralization tests in which the presence of 
virus is indicated by its cytopathogenic effect 
on the fibroblasts. -41~0 such cultures oon- 
tinue to produce virus for a period of about 
four weeks, long after the degeneration of the 
fibroblasts. 
===== PAGE 6 =====
AUREOMYCIN, TERRAMYCIN AND RABIES STREET VIRUS 2 13 
1. Robbins, F. C., Enders, J. F., and Weller, T. H., 
2. Robbins, F. C., Enders, J. F., Weller, T. H., and 
Florentinu, G. L., Am. J. Hyg., 1951, v54, 286. 
3. Ledinko, N., Riordan, J. T., and Melnick, 
J. L., PROC. SOC. EXP. BIOL. AND MED., 1951, v78, 
83. 
4. Youngner, J. S., Ward, E. N., and Salk, J. E., 
Am. J. Hyg., 1952, v55, 301. 
5. Ledinko, N., Riorh, J. T., and Melnick, J. L., 
Am. J. Hyg., 1952, v55, 323, 339. 
6. Scherer, W. F., and Syverton, J. T., J. Exp. Med., 
1952, v96, 369. 
7. Li, C. P., and Schaeffer, M., Communicable Dis- 
ease Center, Montgomery, Ala., Personal communi- 
PROC. SOC. EXP. BIOL. AND MED., 1950, V75, 370. 
lin, A. E., and Rhodes, A. J., Can. J. Med. Science, 
1952, v30, 231. 
9. Baker, L. E., and Carrel, A., J. Exp. Med, 
1928, v47, 353. 
10. Morgan, J. F., Morton, H. J., and Parker, R. 
c., PROC. sot. ED. BIOL. AND MD., 1950, V73, 1. 
11. Salk, J. E., Lewis, L. J., Bennett, B. L., and 
Youngner, J. S., Federation Proc., 1952, vll, 480. 
Although this work does not appear in the abstract, 
it was mentioned by Dr. Salk during the Discussion 
which took place at the Annual Meeting of the 
American Association of Immunologists, New York 
City, April, 1952. 
12. Svedmyr, A., Enders, J. F., and Holloway, A, 
PROC. Soc. EXP. BIOL. AND MED., 1952, v79, 2%. 
cation. Received September 8, 1952. P.S.E.B.M., 1952, v81. 
8. Thicke, J. C., Duncan, D., Wood, W., Frank- 
Ineffectiveness of Aureomycin and Terramycin Against Rabies Street 
Virus in Mice.+ (19824) 
RAYMOND FAG AN.^ (Introduced by J. C. Snyder.) 
From the Department of Microbiology, Harvard University School of Public Health, Boston. 
Them is no therapeutic material that is 
efficacious against infection with ralbies virus. 
Therefore it was of interest It0 try terramycin 
for two reasons: a) concentration of ingested 
terramycin in the brain is reported to be rela- 
tively high ( 1 ) , and !b) conflioting evidence 
has been presented on the efficacy of terramy- 
cin against rabies virus. Quilligan et d(2) 
showed no effect of terramycin on the titration 
of rabies virus in mice, while Azevedo and 
de Macedo(3) claimed 98% survival rates in 
rats and rabbits. This work was undertaken 
to secure more evidence on the action of ter- 
ramycin on the rabies virus, and to compare 
it with aureomycin. 
Method and materials. The virus material 
was rabies street virus in a 20% suspension 
*This work was supported in part by the William 
F. Milton Fund, and by grants from the Lederle 
Laboratories, American Cyanamid Co., the Chas. 
Pfizer Co., and the Division of Research Grants of 
the National Institutes of Health, U. S. Public 
Health Service. 
t Scientist, U. S. Public Health Service. 
$This material was furnished by Dr. Koprowski 
and Dr. Cox of Lederle Laboratories, A,merican 
Cyanamid Co. 
of dog salivary g1and.S The LD50 of this 
virus by intracerebral inoculation in 3-week- 
old white mice was lCF5.8 as calculated by the 
Reed-bluench method (4). T>he terramycin 
and aureomycin were incorporated into finely 
ground fox-chow at the rate of 100 mg of 
antibiotic per 100 g of fed. The mice were 
starved for a day prior to the experiment so 
that they would accept ,the ground mixture. 
In order to get some idea of how much drug 
the mice were ingesting, a weighed amount of 
feed and material was placed in a Petri dish 
and the material was weighed each day. The 
difference was then taken to be the amount 
consumed by the mice in the cage. The 
amount of aureomycin or of terramycin actual- 
ly ingested by mice under this regimen is 
adequate to ensure a defintite therapeutic re- 
sponse with murine and scrub typhus infec- 
tions ( 5). 
Twenty mice divided into 2 
cages with 10 mice in a cage were placed on 
the aureomycin feed mixture. Twenty mice 
divided into 2 cages with 10 mice in a cage 
were placed on the terramycin feed mixture. 
Twenty mice divided into 2 cages with 10 
Procedure. 