
===== PAGE 1 =====
 
 
Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID-19 resource centre with 
free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID-
19. The COVID-19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect, the 
company's public news and information website. 
 
Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID-19-related 
research that is available on the COVID-19 resource centre - including this 
research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other 
publicly funded repositories, such as the WHO COVID database with rights 
for unrestricted research re-use and analyses in any form or by any means 
with acknowledgement of the original source. These permissions are 
granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID-19 resource centre 
remains active. 
 

===== PAGE 2 =====
CHAPTER 1 
Some Cell Culture Procedures in 
Diagnostic Medical Virology 
Margaret A. J. Moffat 
During the last 20 years cell culture has become an invaluable tool in diag­
nostic medical virology. Cultured cells had been used previously for the detec­
tion of virus but it was not until type 2 poliovirus was grown in cultures of 
nonneural tissue from human embryos
1 that the technique began to receive due 
recognition. An easily observed destructive effect or cytopathogenic effect (CPE) 
was produced in the cells by the virus and this effect could be prevented by 
type-specific immune sera providing a convenient neutralization test. 2 Many 
viruses other than poliovirus could be detected and neutralized using this tech­
nique and a large number of previously unknown viruses was isolated. There 
have been continuous developments in cell culture and with each new tech­
nique comes the possibility of detecting the more elusive viruses. As a result 
of this, there are now many different methods of cell culture used in diagnostic 
virology and it is impossible to describe all of these here. I will attempt to give 
representative examples and references with the accent more on different 
methods than on preparation of cultures; such technical details will be found 
elsewhere in this book. The main uses of cell culture in diagnostic medical 
virology are to demonstrate the presence of virus and to detect humoral anti­
bodies in patients' sera. The production of antigens will not be discussed. 
MONOLAYER CULTURES 
General Method of Preparation. Culture of cells in monolayers is the most 
common method used in diagnostic virology laboratories. Cell suspensions are 
prepared from tissue or from stock cultures by using one of the dispersing 
agents. The suspension is then diluted in growth medium to contain from 
50,000 to 200,000 cells per milliliter and dispensed into suitable containers; 
these may be large bottles for stock cultures, test tubes for roller culture, Petri 
1J. F. Enders, T. H. Weller, and F. C. Robbins, Science 109, 85 (1949). 
2 F. C. Robbins, J. F. Enders, and T. H. Weller, Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 75, 378 (1950). 
611 
===== PAGE 3 =====
612 XIII. DIAGNOSIS AND UNDERSTANDING OF DISEASE 
dishes, or coverslips in Leighton tubes. Growth medium usually consists of a 
synthetic medium such as 199 or Eagle's Basal Medium with added 10% calf 
serum. The serum may be varied in type or amount according to the virus or 
cells being cultured. After about 3 days the cultures are changed to maintenance 
medium which may contain 1% serum or be serum-free. Antibiotics are usually 
included. The optimum temperature for growth is 37°C, but after inoculation 
a lower temperature may be more satisfactory. Incubation may be stationary 
or in a roller drum. Containers which are not stoppered, e.g., Petri dishes, must 
be incubated in an atmosphere containing 5% COo in air. 
Types of monolayer cultures may be divided into (a) primary or secondary, 
(b) continuous, and (c) semicontinuous. 
Primary or Secondary Cultures. These cells retain their diploid chromosome 
number, a factor which makes them particularly susceptible to certain viruses. 
Their disadvantage lies in the fact that they must be prepared from fresh tissue 
which may vary in susceptibility. Kidney of various species is particularly suit­
able and monkey kidney is used routinely in most diagnostic laboratories. Simian 
viruses may be present in monkey kidney and apart from herpesvirus simiae, 
which may be a hazard to personnel, SV5 and SV40 may interfere with isola­
tion of other viral agents. Human amnion and human thyroid also provide satis­
factory cell cultures although amnion cultures require more care in preparation. 
Monkey kidney cultures are satisfactory for the isolation of the myxoviruses 
and the enteroviruses except coxsackie A. Human amnion cells support the 
multiplication of measles and enteroviruses including some types of coxsackie A. 
Continuous Cell Cultures. The discovery of a cell line, e.g., HeLa cells, which 
could be subcultured indefinitely was of considerable importance. These cells 
were isolated from an epidermoid carcinoma of the cervix 3 and were found to 
support the growth of a large number of viruses. Since then, other cell lines, 
HEp-2 (human epithelium), have been isolated and it has also been possible 
to transform normal cells, e.g., BHK 21 (baby hamster kidney) and RK 13 
(rabbit kidney). The Bristol strain of HeLa cells is particularly useful for the 
isolation of respiratory syncytial virus, and RK 13 cells produce a recognizable 
CPE when infected with rubella virus. Adenoviruses and herpes simplex pro­
duce a characteristic CPE in HeLa and HEp-2 cells. 
Although the advantages of continuous cell cultures seemed so considerable 
that they might replace primary and secondaiy cultures, this has not been the 
case. During transformation of the cells the chromosome number becomes ab­
normal and the susceptibility to certain viruses is lowered. 
Semicontinuous Cell Cultures. The ideal cell system for a diagnostic virology 
laboratory would be a continuous line which retained its diploid chromosome 
number. An attempt to attain this ideal system was made by subculturing 
G. O. Gey, W. D. Coffmann, and M. T. Kubicek, Cancer Res. 12, 264 (1952). 
===== PAGE 4 =====
1. Culture Procedures in Medical Virology 613 
cells from human embryonic tissue. 4 The cells, of the fibroblast type, remained 
diploid and could be subcultured up to fifty times. Such cultures can be pre­
served by freezing and thus theoretically provide a constant supply of cells. 
These semicontinuous cells may be as susceptible to certain viruses as pri­
mary or secondary cells but this is not always the case. They provide a par­
ticularly satisfactory host system for cytomegalovirus, varicella zoster, herpes 
simplex, and certain rhino viruses. 
ROUTINE ISOLATION OF VIRUSES 
It would be impossible in a routine laboratory to inoculate each specimen 
into every type of cell culture. A routine procedure is therefore employed and 
the specimen is inoculated into three types of cells which will support the 
growth of as many viruses as possible. For this purpose the cells are usually 
grown in stoppered test tubes which may or may not be 'rolled." Rotation only 
seems to be essential for the isolation of certain rhinoviruses which also require 
a lower temperature (33°C) and a lower pH (6.8). A typical routine method 
for virus isolation may include the inoculation of: (a) secondary monkey kidney 
or human amnion cells, and (b) HeLa or Hep-2 cells. If the presence of rhino-
viruses, cytomegaloviruses, or varicella zoster is suspected, human embryo fibro­
blasts should also be inoculated; rubella virus can be isolated in RK 13 cells 
while respiratory syncytial virus requires the more susceptible Bristol strain of 
HeLa cells. 
Two tubes of each type of culture are inoculated with a small amount of 
the specimen (0.2 ml) and the tubes are then incubated. They are examined 
microscopically using a low-power objective every 2 days for 10 days or longer 
depending on the virus. If there is no evidence of virus after this time the cells 
may be inoculated into fresh cultures (blind passage). 
DETECTION OF VIRUS IN CELL CULTURES 
Degenerative Changes (CPE) in the Cells. Different virus groups produce 
characteristic changes in the monolayers which can be seen microscopically, 
e.g., adenoviruses produce a clumping effect while enteroviruses produce round­
ing and shrinking of the cells. The CPE and the type of cells in which it is 
seen help to diagnose the virus. Identification is carried out by neutralization 
test in which the infected fluid is treated with known antisera; these virus-
serum mixtures are inoculated into cell cultures and after incubation the cells 
are examined to determine which antiserum has neutralized the effect of the 
virus. In the case of large groups of viruses such as the echoviruses it is usual 
to combine several antisera in pools. 
The CPE of a virus may be made more visible by the staining of cells, e.g., 
4L. Hayflick and P. S. Moorehead, Exp. Cell Res. 25, 585 (1961); cf. Sections II and IV, 
this volume. 
===== PAGE 5 =====
614 XIII. DIAGNOSIS AND UNDERSTANDING OF DISEASE 
for identification of respiratory syncytial virus a 1:8000 dilution of neutral red 
is added to the inoculated cultures. 
Hemadsorption Test. This technique has been found useful for the detection 
of certain viruses, such as parainfluenza, which do not always give a definite 
CPE in tissue culture. 5 The test is performed by adding 0.2 ml of 0.4% guinea 
pig or human "O" erythrocytes to roller tube cultures which have been incu­
bated for 5 to 7 days following inoculation; uninoculated controls must be 
included. The tubes are incubated at 4°C for 20 minutes and then examined 
microscopically. A positive test is indicated by the adherence of red cells to 
the cultures. A hemadsorption inhibition test is then carried out by inoculating 
infected fluid into more cultures and incubating them until the hemadsorption 
test is positive. The medium is then replaced with fresh medium containing 
specific antisera and the tubes are incubated at 37°C for 1 hour. The fluid is 
removed and a hemadsorption test is carried out. Inhibition of hemadsorption 
by a particular antiserum indicates the identity of the virus. 
Fluorescent Antibody Technique. Virus may be detected in cell cultures by 
this method before CPE occurs, thus providing a quick specific diagnostic test. 
The method has been successfully used for the diagnosis of respiratory syncytial 
virus infections.
6 The tube cultures are inoculated and incubated in the usual 
way. For fluorescent antibody examination the cells are scraped off the tubes 
and transferred to slides. After fixing they are then stained by the indirect method 
with rabbit antiserum, e.g., against respiratory syncytial virus, followed by 
fluorescein-conjugated anti-rabbit globulin. The virus can easily be detected 
within the cells when the preparations are examined in the ultraviolet microscope. 
Interference Test. This test is not used routinely but may be useful to detect 
the presence of viruses which cannot be demonstrated by conventional methods. 
For example some rhinoviruses and rubella virus were first isolated by this 
technique. 7' 8 African green monkey kidney cell cultures were originally used 
for rubella. Throat washings or other suitable specimens are inoculated into 
each of two tube cultures and after 1 hour at room temperature the inoculum 
is removed and replaced by nutrient medium. Following incubation for 7 days, 
one of each pair of cultures is tested by challenge with 1000 TCID 50 of echo-
virus type 11; control cultures are also inoculated and all cultures are incubated. 
When the control cultures show an advanced CPE, fluids are collected from 
control and test cultures and assayed for hemagglutination. Reduction of the 
hemagglutination titer in the test culture indicates the presence of a virus in 
the initial inoculum. 
5R. M. Chanock, R. H. Parrott, K. Cook, B. E. Andrewes, J. A. Bell, T. Reichelderfer, 
A. Z. Kapikian, F. M. Mastrota, and R. J. Huebner, N. Engl. /. Med. 258, 207 (1958). 
6 P. S. Gardner and J. McQuillin, Brit. Med. J. 3, 340 (1968). 
7G. Hitchcock and D. A. J. Tyrrell, Lancet i, 237 (1960). 
8E. L, Buescher, P. D. Parkman, M. S. Artenstein, and S. B. Halstead, Fed. Proc. 21, 466 
(1962). 
===== PAGE 6 =====
1. Culture Procedures in Medical Virology 615 
MIXED CULTURE TECHNIQUE (COCULTIVATION) 
This method has proved of value when a viral agent is difficult to isolate 
from the original tissue, e.g., isolation of measles from a brain biopsy. 9 
Primary cultures are prepared from such tissues by standard methods and 
allowed to grow into monolayers. They are then trypsinized and suspended in 
growth medium. One volume of this suspension is then combined with two vol­
umes of HeLa cells and this mixture is cultured (see monolayer cultures). It 
is possible that a CPE will develop in the HeLa cells although no CPE was 
seen in the primary culture of the tissue. 
ORGAN CULTURE 
Cultures of chopped tissues have been used for many years to support the 
growth of viruses but the techniques were not readily applicable to diagnostic 
virology. However, a simple method of cultivating fragments of ciliated epi­
thelium was described 10 which resulted in the isolation of new rhinoviruses and 
a new member of the corona virus group. 11 
For the isolation of respiratory viruses, tracheas of 14- to 22-week-old human 
embryos are chopped into fragments; these are planted with the ciliated surface 
uppermost on the scratched surface of a plastic Petri dish and medium (e.g., 
Medium 199) is added. After approximately 2 days the cultures are inoculated 
by dropping a small amount of the specimen onto the fragments and incubating. 
Virus may be detected in the following ways: (a) stopping of ciliary activity 
which may take 7-10 days, (b) fragments may be rubbed gently in distilled 
water and the suspension examined by negative contrast in the electron micro­
scope, (c) the medium may be collected, sedimented in the ultracentrifuge, and 
examined in the electron microscope, or (d) the tissue may be examined for 
pathological changes. 
A recent report describes the use of human embryo liver cultures for experi­
ments with Australia antigen. 12 The antigen was detected by complement fixa­
tion test and by means of electron microscopy after freezing and thawing of the 
cells. 
DETECTION OF VIRAL ANTIBODIES 
Immunofluorescence Studies 
1. Monolayer cultures. Cells may be cultured on coverslips, in Leighton tubes, 
or in Petri dishes. A suspension of cells is prepared in growth medium and 
9L. Horta-Barbosa, D. A. Fuccillo, and J. L. Sever, Nature (London) 221, 974 (1969). 
10 B. Hoorn, Acta Oto-Laryngol. Suppl. 188, 138 (1964). 
11 D. A. J. Tyrrell and M. L. Bynoe, Brit. Med. J. 1, 1467 (1965). 
12 A. J. Zuckerman, P. M. Baines, and J. D. Almeida, Nature (London) 236, 78 (1972). 
===== PAGE 7 =====
616 XIII. DIAGNOSIS AND UNDERSTANDING OF DISEASE 
added in a concentration which will produce a monolayer. If Petri dishes are 
used it is helpful to make the coverslips adhere to the glass with a small spot 
of wax or silicone grease. Petri dishes may need to be incubated in an atmosphere 
of 5% C0 2 in air but the use of HEPES buffer will overcome this. The method 
has been found particularly useful in the diagnosis of rubella to detect rubella-
specific IgM antibody. 13 Coverslip cultures of BHK 21 cells are prepared and 
inoculated with rubella virus. After incubation the cultures are fixed in acetone 
and can be preserved at — 20°C in the presence of silica gel. Uninfected cul­
tures are also necessary. To detect rubella-specific IgM in human serum, dilu­
tions of the serum are overlaid on the rubella-infected coverslip cultures. After 
incubation for 30 minutes followed by a thorough washing the coverslips are 
treated with fluorescein-labeled anti-human IgM. Specific fluorescence indicates 
the presence of rubella-specific IgM antibody due to recent infection. 
2. Suspended cell cultures. Indirect immunofluorescence is used routinely to 
measure antibodies to EB virus. 14 Coverslip cultures cannot be prepared in the 
usual way since EB cells are cultured in suspension and do not attach to the 
surface of a glass vessel. Cell smears are therefore prepared. After centrifuga-
tion of the cultures the supernatant fluid is removed and the cells are resus­
pended in the remaining fluid. A small drop of this suspension is placed on a 
coverslip, evenly distributed over the surface, and allowed to dry thoroughly at 
37°C. The coverslips are then fixed. Using the indirect method the coverslip 
preparations are exposed to diluted test serum (1:8) for 1 hour at 37°C. After 
washing, fluorescein isothiocyanate-labeled serum prepared to the appropriate 
globulin is added and left for a further incubation period; the coverslips are 
then washed and mounted. Specific fluorescence in the cells indicates EB anti­
body and the test can be made quantitative by using dilutions of serum. 
Plaque Inhibition Test. The original demonstration
15 that polio virus could 
produce plaques in monolayer cultures of monkey kidney cells has led to the 
demonstration of plaque production by most viruses. Cell monolayers are pre­
pared in flat bottles or Petri dishes. The growth medium is removed and the 
cells are inoculated with virus. After a suitable time for adsorption (1 hour) 
the virus is removed and the monolayers are overlaid with growth medium 
containing agar (1.5%); neutral red may be incorporated in the medium. An accu­
rate measurement of the number of plaque-forming units may be calculated 
after incubation. The neutralizing capacity of serum may be measured by 
mixing the serum with a known amount of virus and comparing the number 
of plaques produced by the mixture with the number produced by virus without 
serum. This method is sensitive and provides a more accurate neutralization 
test for enteroviruses than tube cultures
16 but it is more cumbersome and is 
therefore not used widely in routine laboratories. The plaque test has also been 
used to differentiate between wild and vaccine strains of polio virus. 
13 M. Haire and D. S. M. Hadden, /. Med. Microbiol. 5, 237 (1972). 
14 G. Henle and W. Henle, /. Bacteriol. 91, 1248 (1966). 
35 R. Dulbecco and M. Vogt, /. Exp. Med. 99, 167 (1954). 
MG. D. Hsiung and J. L. Melnick, Virology 1, 533 (1955). 
===== PAGE 8 =====
2. Use of Cultures Initiated from Amniocentesis 617 
Metabolic Inhibition Test. This test depends on the ability to use the metab­
olism of cell cultures as an indication of virus growth. 17 Acid is produced by 
actively growing cultures but if the metabolism is inhibited by the presence 
of virus the pH will be different; such differences can be measured if an indica­
tor is incorporated in the medium. Neutralization tests can therefore be carried 
out using this principle, i.e., if virus is neutralized by antiserum and inoculated 
into cell cultures the cells will continue to metabolize whereas if there is no 
neutralization metabolism will be reduced. This test can be carried out in tubes, 
macroplates or microplates. Rigid disposable plastic plates have proved satis­
factory. Serum dilutions in 0.025-ml amounts can be prepared in the plates and 
an equal quantity of virus added. After incubation of the serum-virus mixtures 
for 1 hour a suitable dilution of cells in 0.1 ml medium is added. The plates are 
then sealed with transparent tape and incubated. If phenol red is incorporated 
in the medium, neutralization will be indicated by a yellow color; the virus 
control will be pink. Time of incubation will vary for different viruses and modi­
fications such as the addition of extra glucose and/or magnesium chloride have 
been made. The test has been used for coxsackie B viruses and rhinoviruses and 
has proved valuable to distinguish between wild and vaccine strains of polio­
virus. It is economical on reagents and space. 
17 F. L. Shand, /. Med. Lab. Technol. 18, 75 (1961). 
Carlo Volenti 
The prenatal detection of genetic disorders, by the analysis of cultivated 
fetal cells obtained by amniocentesis during the second trimester, has recently 
added a new useful and very promising dimension to genetic counseling, once 
based on empirical statistical data. 1-3 The indications to genetic diagnostic 
1 A. Dorfman (ed.), "Antenatal Diagnosis." The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 
Illinois, 1972. 
2 A. Milunsky, J. W. Littlefield, J. N. Kaufer, E. H. Kolodny, V. E. Shih, and L. Atkins, 
N. Engl. J. Med. 283, 1370, 1441, 1498 (1970). 
3C. Valenti, Ric. Clini. Lab. 1, 443 (1971). 
CHAPTER 2 
Cultures Initiated 