
===== PAGE 1 =====
It is further indicated that progesterone may be 
obtained from the reaction in an alternate state Pi. 
Preliminary studies indicate that Pi is water soluble, 
but further studies are in progress on the nature of 
this change. 
One of the most meaningful aspects of this study 
may be the ilz vitro demonstration of the effect of a 
hormone on an enzymatic reaction at a subcellular 
level. It is furthermore indicated that the participa- 
tion of the hormone in the enzymatic reaction results 
in its alteration (metabolism!). This specific example 
may, therefore, illustrate a concept of wide applica- 
tion and significance. 
References 
1. JONES. H. W.. WADHI. 0. RUTH. and GOLDBERG. B. Am. J. 
0b8tet.' ~~necol., 64, ill8 (1952). 
2. DuBo~s, K. P., and POTTER, V. R. J. Btol. Ckem., 150, 185 
(1943). 
3. MICHAELIS, L. Biochem. Z., 234, 139 (1934). 
4. FISKE, C. H., and SUBBAROW, Y. J. Biol. Chem., 66, 375 
(1925). 
5. Nov~~o~r, A. B., HECHT, L., PODBER, E., and RYAN, J. J. 
Biol. Chem., 194, 153 (1962). 
6. MARQUETTE. M.. and SCEWEIGEBT. B. S. Science. 111. 660 . . 
(1950). 
7. SWANSON, M. A. J. Btol. Chem., 191, 577 (1951). 
Manuscript received November 10, 1952. 
A Simplified Method for Cultivation of 
Poliomyelitis Virus in Tissue Culture 
C. P. Li and Morris Schaeffer 
Virus and Rickettsia Section, 
Colnnrunicable Disease Center, Public Healtb Sewice, 
U. S. Department of Healtb, Education and Welfare, 
Montgomery, Alabama 
Roller tube tissue culture methods, as described by 
Enders and associates (1, 2) and extended by others 
(3-6)) have opened new vistas in poliomyelitis re- 
search by providing techniques more economical than 
previous methods, requiring the use of monkeys, for 
poliomyelitis virus isolation, virus typing, and the 
assay of specific antibodies. 
However, there still remain a number of practical 
difficulties and limitations, and foremost among them 
are the ingredients of the medium. Tissues su~h as 
human embryo and monkey testes either are not 
always readily available or are expensive. Horse serum 
is frequently inhibitory to virus, and chick embryo 
extracts are at times sources of contamination. While 
search is continuing for a suitable substitute for mon- 
key testes, currently the most commonly employed tis- 
sue, we wish to report briefly on some changes in 
technique. These modifications permit the rotary drum 
to be dispensed with, and, when monkey testis tissue 
is used, the chick embryo extract and horse serum to 
be replaced by plasma hydrolyzate with rather satis- 
factory results. 
Shortly after tissue culture study with poliomyelitis 
virus was instituted at this laboratory one year ago, 
it was observed that rotation of the tissue cultures is 
FIG. 1. Wooden racks holding tissue culture tubes in up- 
right position or in slanted position. 
not essential for adequate cell or virus multiplication. 
If the culture tubes are kept stationary in slanted 
position so that the fluid just covers the tissue em- 
bedded at the lower end of the test tube, the cells as 
well as the virus grow very well. Other workers have 
had similar experience (7-9). 
Of a number of substances tested with a view to- 
ward replacement of chick +mbryo extract and horse 
serum, bovine plasma hydrolyzatel proved most satis- 
factory. Consequently, a medium incorporating this 
material was devised; it is designated Medium E. 
Medium E is rather simple, consisting of 75% Hank- 
Simms (Hank's 3 parts, Simms' 1 part) solution and 
25% of the bovine plasma hydrolyzate; It is adjusted 
to pH 7.0-7.2 by the addition of sterile sodium bicar- 
bonate solution. Recently it has been found that the 
Simms serum ultrafiltrate may be omitted entirely 
with equally good results. 
The tissue cultures are prepared with fragments of 
monkey testicular tissue covered with 2 cc of the 
medium in ordinary bacteriological test tubes, 15 x 150 
mm, similar to the techniques of Youngner, Ward, and 
Salk (5) and Ledinko, Riordan, and Melnick (6). 
The tubes are inserted into especially designed wooden 
racks, 11% x 5y2 x 5y2 in., with holes for 4 rows of 
tubes, 8 tubes/row. When the rack is placed side- 
wise, a strip of wood about 1 cm thick across the 
upper back keeps the tubes in a slanted position at 
an angle of about 5O above horizontal level, and the 
medium just covers the tissue. When the tubes are 
moved from one place to another, the rack is carried 
in an upright position to prevent the fluid from touch- 
ing the rubber stoppers (Fig. 1). 
The cultures are incubated at 35' C for 5-7 days. 
No change of the medium is required during this 
period. The medium is then removed, and the vim, 
or other material desired to be cultured (in an amount 
of about 0.1 cc), is placed in contact with the cells 
for about 10 min, after which 2 cc of fresh medium is 
added. Incubation is continued and the cells are ob- 
served. With this procedure, both the fibroblasts and 
the virus grow well in Medium E, and, although the 
cells do not grow so richly and densely as those cul- 
tured in Medium A of Youngner, Ward, and Salk 
1 Obtained commercially as Travamin, a sterile 5% solu- 
tion of bovine plasma hydrolyzate, w/v in water, from Baxter 
Laboratories, Inc., Morton Grove, Ill. Recently Melnlck and 
Riordan (8) reported that lactalbumin enzymatic hydrolyzate 
is also satisfactory. 

===== PAGE 2 =====
FIGS. 2-5. The cytopathogenic effect of poliomyelitis viruses on monkey testicular tissue culture Nedium E without ro- 
tation, showing various degrees of cellular degeneration. 75 x. Fig. 2. First degree of degeneration. Beginning degeneration 
of the periphery of the outgrowth zone. Twelve-day viral growth. (Mouse-adapted Type I11 Leon virus.) Fig. 3. Second degree 
of degeneration. Massive degeneration of the entire outgrowth. Four-day viral growth. (Tissue-culture-adapted Type I Mahouey 
virus.) Fig. 4. Third degree of degeneration. The outgrowth is almost entirely gone. The periphery of the mother tissue itself 
shows degeneration. Seven-day viral growth. (Tissue-culture-adapted Type I Mahoney virus.) Fig. 5. Control. Ten-day cellular 
culture without inoculation of virus. 
(5), they are not granular as are those observed in 
Medium A. The pH of this medium does not drop so 
rapidly as does the medium containing chick embryo 
extract and horse serum. Consequently the number of 
necessary changes of medium is reduced. 
The cellular degeneration caused by poliomyelitis 
viruses in Medium E is not only clearly defined but 
also, because nonspecific degeneration does not readily 
occur in uninfected tissue, the specific effects may be 
more easily recognized. There appears to be no dif- 
ference in virus yield when this technique is compared 
to techniques employing the other media with and 
without the use of the rotary drums. For instance, a 
culture of Type I virus (Mahoney strain2) in Medium 
E without rotation yielded a pooled fluid with a tissue 
culture titer of 10-5. This is the highest titer we have 
obtained as yet with any medium with or without rota- 
tion. 
The cytopathogenic effects of the viruses on tissue 
culture cells in Medium E without rotation are shown 
in Figs. 2-5. 
*Kindly supplied by J. E. Salk, Pittsburgh. Pa. 
===== PAGE 3 =====
In a number of tests, cultures in Medium E without 
rotation have proved satisfactory for primary isola- 
tion of virus and for the performance of neutraliza- 
tion tests with the three types of poliomyelitis virus. 
Poliomyelitis viruses have been isolated from infected 
monkey cord, mouse cord, and human stools. One of 
the stool specimens was negative by monkey inocula- 
tion, but positive results were obtained by this tissue 
culture method. The fluid phase of this tissue culture, 
produced paralysis in two monkeys inoculated with it, 
and poliomyelitis was confirmed by histopathologio 
findings. 
Neutralization tests, with the Mahoney strain as 
the test virus, have been performed by this method on 
a group of 80 human serum specimens with quite 
satisfactory results. In non-neutralized mixtures first 
evidence of cellular degeneration was usually observed 
On a New Derivative of Thiamine 
with Cysteine 
Taizo Matsukawa and Shojiro Yurugi 
Research Laboratory, Takeda Pharmaceutical 
Industries, Ltd., Osaka, Japan 
The mechanism of thiamine in the metabolism in the 
living body is not yet clear. Zima and Williams (1) 
previously proposed a redox system between the thiol 
form of thiamine and thiamine disulfide. 
The present authors have recently hypothesized a 
mechanism of thiamine in a medium that contains 
cystine, cysteine, glutation, or proteins having thiol 
groups, and have studied as a model experiment the 
reactions between thiamine and cystine, and between 
thiamine disulfide and cysteine by paper partition 
chromatography. 
(1) Thiamine and equivalent cystine were dissolved 
in a phosphate buffer solution (pH 7.5), left stand- 
ing at 37' C for 20 min, and then subjected to paper 
partition chromatography using the solvent prepared 
by shaking a mixture of alcohol, acetic acid, butanol, 
and water (1 :1:4: 10) and then drawing off the 
lower layer (Table 1). 
on the second day after inoculation with the virus. 
This became fairly definite by the third day, and the 
final readings were possible on the fourth day. 
References 
1. ENDERS,J. F., WELLER, T.H., and ROBRINS, F. C. Sc6enoe, 
109,85 (1949). 
2. ROBBINS,F. C., et al. Am. J. Hug., 54, 286 (1951). 
3. 	SMITH, W. M., CHAMBERS, V. C., and EVANS, C. A. Pro& 
Soc. E~ptl. Biol. Ned., 76, 696 (1951). 
4. SYVERTON, W. F., and BUTORAC, J. T., SCHERER, G. Ibid., 
77, 23 (1951). 
5. YOUNGNER. WARD. E. ' N.. and SALK. J. E. Ant.J. S.. 	 J. 
-	 Hug., 55, 2.91 (1952). 
6. LEDINKO,N., RIORDAN,J. T., and MELNICK, J. L. Ibid., 
323. 
7. SCHERER.W. and SYYERTON. I.. J. T. J. Emptl. died., 96, 
369 (1952). 
8. MELNICK,J. L., and RIORDAN, J. T. Proc. Soc. Effiptl. BdoE. 
Med.. 81. 208 (1952). 
9. ENDERS; J. F.', and ROBBINS, F. C. Personal communica-
tions. 
Manuscript received October 31, 1952. 
The five paper strips on which the specimen was 
developed under the same conditions were dried in air 
and sprayed separately with the reagents indicated 
in Table 1. 
The zones of Rf 0.04-0.05, 0.28-0.29, 0.29-0.31, and 
0.36-0.38 correspond to cystine, cysteine, thiamine, 
and thiamine disulfide (VI), respectively. Besides 
these a new zone of Rf 0.14-0.15 was clearly detected 
by the reagents D, N, and I between the zones of 
cystine and thiamine. 
When the paper strip sprayed with the reagent B 
was heated at 70-80' C for 5-10 min and then sprayed 
with the reagent A, the zone corresponding to thia- 
mine showed strong fluorescence of thiochrome under 
the quartz mercury lamp, while the zones of Rf 0.14- 
0.15 and thiamine disulfide (VI) did not. However, 
when the paper strip was sprayed with the reagent C 
and heated at 70-80' C for 15-30 min in order to 
reduce the substances before spraying with the re-
agents B and A, all the three zones showed strong 
fluorescence. 
From the result it seems evident that the new zone 
of Rf 0.14-0.15 means a new compound having the 
structure (IV) which was produced from the thiol 
form (11) of thiamine and cystine (111). 
TABLE 1 
Thiamine Thiamine 
Reagents Cystine cysteine Cysteine Thiamine disulfide 
(IV) (VI) 
D = the Kraut-Dragendorff reagent (2). 
N = 0.2% solution if ninhydrin in the water saturated with 
butanol. 
I = 0.05 aqueous solution of iodine containing % 
sodium azide. The reagent used for the detection of sulfur- 
containing amino acids (8) (thiamine and some related corn- 
pounds can be detected by this reagent). 
July 24, 1953 
B = this reagent is pre~ared bs adding 10% solution of 
sodium cyanide to the water sahrated with bromine until 
the color of the bromine has disappeared (this is used instead 
of potassium ferricyanide to oxidize thiamine to thiochrome). 
C = 0.4% solution of cysteine hydrochloride in water. 
A=5% solution of sodium hydroxide in the water satur-
ated with butanol. 
The mark (--) implies weak detection. 
109 