
===== PAGE 1 =====
January 28, 1949, Vol. 109 SCIENCE 	 85 
of tlie sccond instar which, according to the curve, reachcs 
a final width, on molting, of 5.1 mm and it, in turn, 
again becomes a new initial width. Continuing in this 
nianncr, it has been possible to estimate the number of 
l)ostlarral molts and the width of cach instar, of which 
L," 
60 
250 
a.Q 
230 
20 
210 0 MALE CRABS 
WEIGHT :0.00026 WIOTH~'~~ 
ooa . FEMPhE CRIBS 
WEIGHT = 0.00034 WIOTM~.~' pq 
1-20 IINSTAR NUMBERS FOR MALES 
170 
160 
'nxlso a 
gs 
f 'M 
120 
+I 
2 I10 
W 
IF 
-90 
ao. 
0 
60 
Jo 
2 
30 
20 
-10 
-0 
0 2 5 I'e 1'1 I'e ~b 20 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 YO 150 160 170 180 
WIDTH I N MILLIMETERS 
FIG. 2. Showing growth trends in Gallinectrs 
supidus Rathbun, based upon growth curve of Fig. I. 
tlrere are believed to be 19 or 20 in males and 18, or pos- 
sibly 19, in female blue crabs (7). A mathematical equa- 
tion mas fitted to the molting curve for males and females 
so that from any initial width one can calculate directly 
thc final width after molting. Hence, knowing the width 
of the first postlarval instar, it was possible to calculate 
the widths of the remaining instars. 
To complete the story, it was necessary to establish 
the relationship between the width dimension, selected 
for a basic index of size, and other linear and also 
weight measurements. The allometry equation Y = aXb, 
was found to constitute a satisfactory expression of the 
different linear and also weight relationships. Conse-
quently, from a width measurement, any of the corre-
sponding linear and weight dimensions can be readily 
ascertained. Since the width of each instar has been 
determined, it is now possible to calculate the remaining 
linear dimensions and the weights of each instar (Fig. 2). 
The information provided by this procedure makes it 
possible to analyze certain characteristics of the growth 
of body parts in relation to one another and to the whole 
body. Also, a basis is provided for interprcting the 
effect of environmental conditions and mechanical injury 
on the normal growth curve as established by the pre- 
ceding technics. Thc method has potential use for 
comparing diffcrential growth rates in geographic vari- 
eties as wcll as closely rclated species. 
References 
1. 	 CAr,ven~, PHII.LIP P. Proe. Amer. philos. 8oc., 1929, 
68 (3), 227-274. 
2. GRAY, 	 CURTISL.1I.LeN H., and NEWCOMRE, Growth, 
1938, 2 (3), 235-46. 
3. 	 GRAY, E~LLEN H., and N~wconze~, CURTIS L. Growth, 
1938, 2 (41, 285--96. 
4. MACICAY, C. WEYMOUTH, W.D~NAI,D 0., and FRANK 
J. Biol. Rd. Ganad. 1935, 1 (3),191-212. 
5. 	 MUSCONI,L. Boll. Lab. Zool. gew. agrar. R. Scuoln 
Sup. Agric., 1926, 18, 95-118. 
6. Iu'rcwc:on~r%e, 	 ALLEN M, and CAMP- CUHTIS I,., ECICSTINE, 
Icel.r,. If'~ah-IC. Norrthern li'ish.erman, in press. 
7. 	 NewcoMu~, CURTIS L., Sa~noz, MILDRED D., and Rocess- 
'L'AI,BI~:RT, .I. emp. Med., in press. Kosn1.1a:. 
S. 	 RoBER'l'SON, ROYI;. Masters Degree Thesis, University 
of Maryland, 1938, 1-30. 
9. 	 S~.Laea, G. D. Stun. Univ. Publ. biol. Soi., 1923, 3, 
307-338. 
10. Wess~u~n~-I,us~, Inter. Rev. gesam.C. Hydrobiol. 
Hfldrogr., 1913, 6, 4-5, 373-422. 
Cultivation of the Lansing Strain of 
Poliomyelitis Virus in Cultures of 
Various Human Embryonic Tissues1 
John F. Enders, Thomas H. Weller; 
and Frederick C. Robbins" 
Research Division of Iafectious Diseases, Children's 
Hospital, and Departmeltts of Bacteriology, 
Comparative Pathology, and Pediatrics, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston 
An extraneural site for the multiplication of the virus 
of poliomyelitis has been considered by a number of in- 
vestigators (2, 6). The evidence that this may occur is 
almost entirely indirect, although recent data indicate 
that Theiler's mouse encephalomyelitis virus as well as 
various mouse pathogcnic poliomyelitis-like viruses of un- 
certain origin may multiply in nonnervous tissue (1,3). 
Direct attempts by Sabin and Olitsky (4) to demonstrate 
in vitro multiplication of a monkey-adapted strain of 
poliomyelitis virus (MV strain) in cultures composed of 
certain nonnervous tissues failed. They obtained, how- 
ever, an increase in the agent in fragments of human 
embryonic brain. 
Thc general recognition that the virus may be present 
in the intestinal tract of patients with poliomyelitis and 
of persons in contact with them emphasizes the desirabil- 
ity of further investigation of the possibility of extra-
neural multiplication. Accordingly, experiments with 
tissue cultures were undertaken to determine whether the 
1,ansing strain of poliomyelitis virus could be propagated 
IAided by a grant from the National Foundation for In- 
fantile Paralysis, Inc. 
a Post joctorate Byellow of the U. S. Public Health Service. 
3 Senior Fellow in Virus Diseases of the National Research 
Conncil. 
===== PAGE 2 =====
- - -- 
-- --- - 
86 SCIENCE January 28, 1949, Vol. 109 
in three types of human embryonic tissues. The results 
are summarized here in a preliminary manner. 
The technique was essentially the same as that recently 
described for the cultivation of mumps virus (6). The 
cultures consisted of tissue fragments suspended in 3 cc 
of a mixture of balanced salt solution (3 parts) and ox 
serum ultrafiltrate (1 part). Tissues from embryos of 
273 to 44 months as well as from a premature infant of 
7 months' gestation were used. These were: the tissues 
of the arms and legs (without the large bones), the 
intestine, and the brain. Each set of cultures included 
4 or more inoculated with virus, and usually a similar 
number of uninoculated controls. The primary inoculum 
consisted of 0.1 cc of a suspension of mouse brain in-
fected with the Lansing strain of poliomyelitis virus.4 
The identity of the virus was verified by (a) the char- 
the fluids removed from the third subculture on the 16th 
day of cultivation. These fluids, however, on inoculation 
into mice and monkeys, produced typical paralysis. Ac-
cordingly, since the mouse LD,, of the original inoculum 
was it would appear that the increase in virus dur- 
ing the course of the experiment was at least of the 
order of 10IVimes. During the 67-day period of cultiva- 
tion a progressive decrease in mouse infectivity was re-
corded (Table 1). On the other hand, in the second ex- 
periment, mentioned above, the calculated increase in 
virus during a 52-day period is now of the order of lo1" 
times and no decrease in mouse infectivity has so far 
been observed. 
The agent propagated in the first experiment continued 
to exhibit the principal characteristics of the Lansing 
strain during the period of cultivation, as indicated by 
TABLE 1 
MULTIPLICATION LANSING VIEUSIN PROhI ESTRE~IITIIS IIUWAN E~IRRTOS OR POI~IOMYILITIS TISSUESOBTAIKEU THE OH 
No. of nutrient fluid 
Culture set changes prior to 
subculture 
Exp. 1 Exp. 2 
Original* 3 4 
1st subculturc 2 2 
2nd subculture 2 4 
3rd subculture 3 .. 
Day of incubation Mouse LD, of pooled Ca1cul:ttcd dilution 
suhculture done fluids used to iuocu- of original inoculum 
late subcultures at time of subculture 
- A---- -- - -
Exp. 1 Exp. 2 Exp. 1 Exp. 2 Exp. 1 Eup. 2 
20th 20th 10 167 10-6 10-8 
19th 12th 10-117 10-8 filo20 10-111 10-100 
12th 20th 10-0~3 10-134 10-12 E 10 102 
16th .... 10-018 ..... 10-177 ..... 
* The LD, of the suspension of mouse brain used as the inoculum in the first experiment was 10 2; that of the sus-
pension employcd in the second experiment was 10-l.O1. 
acter of the disease it produced in white mice following 
intracerebral inoculation; and (b) its neutralization by 
specific antiser~m.~ Subcultures were inoculated with 
0.1 cc of pooled centrifuged supernatant fluids removed 
from the previous set of cultures. 
The procedure of cultivation differed from that usually 
followed by other workers in that the nutrient fluid was 
removed as completely as possible and replaced at periods 
ranging from 4 to 7 days. Subcultures to fresh tissue 
were prepared at relatively infrequent intervals, ranging 
from 8 to 20 days. 
Two experiments have been carried out employing cul- 
tures composed chiefly of skin, muscle and connective 
tissue from the arms and legs. The findings in each 
have been essentia1,ly the same. In the first, a series of 
cultures has now been maintained for 67 days. During 
this interval, in addition to the original set, three suc-
cessive subcultures have been made to fresh tissue and 
the fluids have been removed and replaced 10 times 
(Table 1). Assuming that at each change of fluid a 
dilution of approximately 1:15 was effected and that at 
the initiation of each set of cultures the inoculum was 
diluted 30 times, it has been calculated that the 10% sus- 
pension of infected mouse brain used as the primary 
inoculum had been diluted approximately 1011 times in 
'This strain was isolated by Dr. Charles Armstrong and 
obtained through the courtesy of Dr. S. D. Kramer. 
6This serum was obtained through the eourtes$ of Dr. 
Isabel Morgan. It was prepared by hyperimmunization of 
rhesus monkeys with her strain of the Lansing virus. 
the following observations: (a) fluids from each set of 
cultures produced paralysis and death in mice after intm- 
cerebral inoculation; (b) the agent present in the fluids 
of the second set of subcultures was neutralized by anti- 
serum specific for the Lansing strain; (c) following 
intracerebral inoculation, the fluids from the third set of 
subcultures produced flaccid paralysis within 7 and 10 
days, respectively, in two rhesus monkeys. Microscopic 
examination of the spinal cords of these animals re-
vealed lesions characteristic of poliomyelitis. 
Cultures of intestinal tissue were prepared with frag- 
ments from the entire intestine of human embryos, ex-
cept in one experiment in which jejunum of a premature 
infant was used. In the latter, the bacteria were elimi- 
nated in the majority of cultures by thorough washing 
of the tissue and by the inclusion in the original nutrient 
fluid of 100 units/cc of penicillin and of streptomycin. 
In one experiment with embryonic intestine, which 111-
eluded two subcultures and 7 changes of nutrient fluid, 
the calculated dilution of the original inoculum was of 
the order of 10'3.7 times. On the basis of the mouse 
LD, of the original inoculum and that of the last super- 
natant fluid, it was calculated that the virus had in-
creased about 10Iz7 times. The identity of the agent 
thus cultivated in intestinal tissue has not yet been con-
firmed by neutralization tests or monkey inoculation, but 
it elicits a response in the mouse typical of the Lansing 
virus. 
The cultures prepared with intestine of the premature 
infant have, so far, been maintained 17 days with 3 
===== PAGE 3 =====
87 January 28, 1949, Vol. 109 	 SCIENCE 
changes of nutrient fluid. Virus has bee11 demonstrated, 
by mouse inoculation, in the fluids removed during the 
course of the experiment, including that of the 17th day. 
The calculated multiplication of the virus was approxi-
mately 10' times. This finding suggests that multiplica- 
tion occurred in this tissue which, from the embryologic 
point of view, is more mature. 
To compare the increase of virus in nervous tissue 
with that in tissue of the intestine and the ertremities, 
cultures of embryonic brain were prepared. The multi- 
plication of the virus in this medium has been comparable 
to that in the other types. Thus in one evperiment 
carried out contemporaneously vith the scries of em-
bryonic intesti~~al cultures mentioned aboce, the cal-
culated multiplication of virus was of the order of 10'' 
times. 
No evidence was obtained which indicated that an 
agent other than the l~ansing strain of virus was propa- 
gated in any of the three types of tissue. hfouse in- 
fectivity tests for the presence of virus ill the super-
natant fluids of uninoculated control cultures were nega- 
tive. Aerobic and anaerobic cultures of supernatant 
fluids yielded no growth of bacteria. 
On microscopic examination of fragments of the three 
types of tissue, removed after about 30 days of cnltiva- 
tion, differences have been observed in cell morphology 
between those derived from inoculated and uninoculated 
cultures. Many of the fmgz~ents from uninoculated cnl- 
tures contained cells which appeared to be viable at the 
time of fixation, as indicated by the normal staining prop- 
erties of the nuclei and cytoplasm. In contrast, the 
nuclei of the majority of the cells in fragments from 
inoculated cultures showed marked loss of staining prop- 
erties. Since the amount of material which 11;~s been 
studied is as yet relatively small, one cannot conclurle 
that the changes observed in the inoculated cultures wcre 
caused by the virus.O 
It would seem, from the experiments described above, 
that the multiplication of the Lansing strain of polio-
myelitis virus in the tissues derived from arm or leg, 
since these do not contain intact neurons, has occurred 
either in peripheral nerve processes or in cells not of 
nervous origin. 
References 
1. Evnns, C. A,, and CIIA~IBER~, C. 1'1.0~. Soc. esp.V. 
I$ioZ. wed., 1948, 68, 436. 
2. 	 EIowm, H. A., and BoDIAN, D. Neural mechal~isms in 
poZiom?/eZitis. New York : Commonwealth Fund, 1942. 
1'. 89. 
3. RTJSTIGIAN, 	 A. M. J. exp. Med., R., and I'APPENHEIMER, 
1:bl:). 89, 69. 
4. 	 SARIN,A. B., and OLITSKY,1'. I<. Proc. SOC. esp. BioZ. 
Med., 1930, 34. 357. 
5. 	 VAN ROOYEN, C. E., and KIIODES,A. J. Vtrus diseases 
of man. (2nd ed.) New York: Nelson, 1948. P. 
939. 
6. 	 IVELLER, T. H., and ENDERS,.T. F. I'TOC. SOC. emp. Uiol. 
Xed., 1048, 69. 124. 
6 We are. indebted to Dr. Duncan Reid and members of the 
staff of the Boston Lying-in Hospital for providing the hu-
man embryonic tissues and to Dr. Alwin M. I'appenheimer 
for the preparation and examination of sections of tissue 
cnltiire materkrl. 
Insect Vectors of Phony Peach Disease1 
William F. Turner 
United States Department of Agriculture, 
Agricultural Research Adnzinistration, 
Bureau of Entomology and Plant Quarantine 
Phony peach is a virus disease of economic importance 
in the southeastern United States (1). While the disease 
attacks other species of the genus Yrunus, its most serious 
effects result from heavy infections in commercial peach 
orchards, particularly in the South Atlantic and Gulf 
Coast States from South Carolina to Louisiana. The dis- 
ease has causrd the 105s of more than 1,500,000 peach 
trees during the period from 1929 to 1Y47, inclusive. 
Since 1936 the Bureau of Entomology and Plant Quar- 
antine, in cooperation with thc Bureau of Plant Industry, 
Soils, and Agricultural Engineering, has been conducting 
research in an effort to find the insect vector, or vectors, 
of phony peach. Follolving an extensive survey of in-
sects associated with peach orchards ia areas where the 
annual disease incideuce was high, in other areas where 
few new cases occurred each year, and finally, in areas 
where there appeared to be no local spread, a test pro- 
gram utilizing the most likely insect suspects was under- 
taken. 
Results of the surrey, together with data derived from 
experimental transmission of the disease, suggested the 
probability that phony peach was being spread by one or 
more stem-feeding Cicadellidae (leaf hoppers) belonging 
to the subfamily Tettigellinae. Although 53 species of 
insects, includiilg ~r~cmbers of several different families 
of IIomoptera ;~nd a i~utnber of species of Cydnidae 
(Hemiptera), hale b(e11 iised in tlansmission tests, most 
attention for the last four years was given to four species 
of leaf hoppers. 
From 1939 through 1944 the work was conducted at 
Chattanooga with fi!ld-grown peach trees that were un-
protected from possible natural infection. During the 
course of these tests three of the experimental trees 
developed symptoms of the disease. One had been sub- 
jected to inoculation by Cuerna costalis (F.), one by 
Graphocep?~ala versuta (Say), and one by Homalodisca 
triquetra (F.),2 a11 members of our selected group of 
suspects. One case of phony peach occurred in one of 
the many check trees that were maintained. 
In 1945 the work was transferred to Fort Valley, 
Georgia, where it was necessary to grow the experimental 
trees in a large screened cage hecause of the certainty of 
considerable natur:rl spread in unprotected trees. Insects 
1 The diagrioses on \vhic*h this report is based were n~:idr 
by Lee M. Hntchins and 1,. C. Cochran of the Bureau of 
Plant Industry, Soils, and Agriciiltural Engineering, and by 
L. D. Christenson and William F. Turner, Bureau of Ento-
mology and I'lant Quarantine, of the United States Depart- 
ment of Agriculture. 
aThe leaf hoppers actually used in each of these and all 
olher tests were identified by P. W. Oman and J. S. Caldwell, 
Division of Insect Identification, Bureau of Entomology and 
I'lant Quar;rntine. 